When you've strayed from the fold
And there's trouble in your soul
Can't you hear the Blessed Saviour Callin' You?
When your soul is lost in sin
And you're at your journey's end
Can't you hear the Blessed Saviour Callin' You?
Callin' You?, (Callin' You?)
Callin' You?, (Callin' You?)
Can't you hear the Blessed Saviour Callin' You?
He will take you by the hand
Lead you to that promise land
Can't you hear the Blessed Saviour Callin' You?
As you journey day by day
And temptation comes your way
Can't you hear the Blessed Saviour Callin' You?
If you'll follow in His light
He will always guide you right
Can't you hear the Blessed Saviour Callin' You?
When your soul is burdened down
And your friend(s) can not be found
Can't you hear the Blessed Saviour Callin' You?
If you'll follow Him each day
He will brighten up your way
Can't you hear the Blessed Saviour Callin' You?
(Oh you) know that I've come back and we've tried it o'er
(But) each time my dear it was worse than before
Now my heart is broke it's sad and it's sore
(So) never again will I knock on your door
(Oh you) know that I love you no other will do
Please tell me darlin' why can't you be true
But now you are gone it's over and so
Never again will I knock on your door
Someday you'll be so lonely and blue
Then you will know just how much I love you
But now you are gone it's over and so
Never again will I knock on your door
Many a night I've cried over you
Hoping and prayin' some day you'd be true
But now you are gone it's over I know
(So) never again will I knock on your door
AS WE JOURNEY ALONG, ON LIFE'S WICKED ROAD,
SO SELFISH ARE WE, FOR SILVER AND GOLD,
YOU CAN TREASURE YOUR WEALTH, YOUR DIAMONDS AND GOLD,
BUT MY FRIENDS IT WON'T SAVE, YOUR POOR WICKED SOUL.
FOR WHEN GOD CALLS, FROM HIS HOME UP ON HIGH,
TO YOUR EARTHLY WEALTH, YOU MUST SAY GOODBYE,
THEN IT'S USELESS TO YOU, IF YOU'VE STRAYED FROM THE FOLD,
FOR MY FRIEND IT WON'T SAVE YOUR POOR WICKED SOUL.
THE RICH MAN LIKE ALL, WILL BE JUDGED AT THAT TIME,
BUT ALL OF HIS WEALTH, WILL BE LEFT BEHIND.
FOR NO MATTER HOW MUCH EARTHLY WEALTH YOU GET HOLD,
WELL MY FRIEND IT WON'T SAVE, YOUR POOR WICKED SOUL.
WHEN THE WORLD IS ON FIRE, ON THAT JUDGEMENT DAY,
FOR ALL OF OUR WRONGS, THEN WE MUST PAY,
BUT THE DEBT CAN'T BE PAID, WITH SILVER AND GOLD,
NO FRIENDS IT WON'T SAVE, YOUR POOR WICKED SOUL.
The ceremony was over
A lad stood alone in tears
For he had just said goodbye
To the one he had loved thru the years.
He stood all alone with his head bowed down
As though his heart would break
Then the Parson came over and took his hand
And to him these words he did say.
When God comes and gathers his jewels
All his treasures of diamonds and gold
You'll meet her up there in heaven so fair
When God comes and gathers his jewels.
Each night when the pale moon is shining
You can see this lad all alone
With his eyes lifted to'ard heaven
He's repeating these words he was told.
I don't care if tomorrow never comes
This world holds nothin' for me
I've been lonely night and day ever since you went away
So I don't care if tomorrow never comes.
If tomorrow never comes and the sun don't ever shine
It won't matter with me
For when she went away, my world ended that day
So I don't care if tomorrow never comes.
My lonely mind wanders back to days that used to be
My broken heart cries out for you
Oh, if I can't have you here, I can't go on my dear
So I don't care if tomorrow never comes.
I'll ne'er forget that sad, sad day 
Darling that you went away 
You told me that our love was true 
And then you left me 'lone and blue 
Yes I received your note today 
Saying you'd come back and stay 
Don't come back now It is too late 
My love for you has turned to hate 
Don't come back now on your knees 
Trying to take me back please 
Cause you can't mend my broken heart 
Because it died When we were apart 
Yes I received Your note today 
Saying you'd Come back and Stay 
Don't come back now It is too late 
My Love for You Has turned to hate
When you are sad and lonely and have no place to go
Call me up, sweet baby, and bring along some dough
And we'll go Honky Tonkin', Honky Tonkin'
Honky Tonkin', Honey Baby
We'll go Honky Tonkin' 'round this town.
When you and your baby have a fallin' out
Just call me up sweet mama and we'll go steppin' out
And we'll go Honky Tonkin', Honky Tonkin'
Honky Tonkin', Honey Baby
We'll go Honky Tonkin' 'round this town.
We're goin' to the city - to the city fair
If you go to the city then you will find me there
And we'll go Honky Tonkin', Honky Tonkin'
Honky Tonkin', Honey Baby
We'll go Honky Tonkin' 'round this town
I have heard your stories about your fast trains
But now I'll tell you about one all the southern folks have seen
She's the beauty of the southlands listen to that whistle scream
It's that Pan American on her way to New Or-leans.
She leaves Cincinnati headin' down that Dixie line
When she passes that Nashville tower you can hear that whistle whine
Stick your head out the window and feel that southern breeze
your on that Pan American on her way to New Or-leans.
Ohio and Kentucky Tennessee and Alabam, the delta state of 
Mississippi, she's Louisina Bound, of the trains in the southland 
this one is the queen, all the way from Cincinnati down to New Orleans.
If your ever in the south lands and want to see the scenes
Just get your self a ticket on that Pan American Queen
Louiville Nashville Montgomery the cap'tal of Ala-bam
You pass right through then all when your New Orleans bound.
She leaves Cincinnati headin' down that Dixie line
When she passes that Nashville tower you can hear that whistle whine
Stick your head out the window and feel that southern breeze
your on that Pan American on her way to New Or-leans.
Came in last night about a half past ten
That woman of mine she wouldn't let me in
Move it on over (move it on over)
Move it on over (move it on over)
Move over little dog cause a big dog's movin in
She changed the lock on my front door
now my key, it don't fit no more
So get it on over (move it on over)
Scoot it on over (move it on over)
Move over skinny dog cause a fat dog's moving in
This dog house here is mighty small
But it's sure better than no house at all
So ease it on over (move it on over)
Drag it on over (move it on over)
Move over old dog cause a new dog's moving in
She told me not to play around
But I done let the deal go down
So pack it on over (move it on over)
Tote it on over (move it on over)
Move over nice dog cause a bad dog's moving in
She warned me once, she warned me twice
But I don't take no one's advice
So scratch it on over (move it on over)
Shake it on over (move it on over)
Move over short dog cause a tall dog's moving in
I'll crawl back to her on my knees
pretty soon i'll be scratching fleas
So slide it on over (move it on over)
Sneak it on over (move it on over)
Move over good dog cause a bad dog's moving in
Remember pup, before you start to whine
That side's yours and this side's mine
So shove it on over (move it on over)
Sweep it on over (move it on over)
Move over cold dog cause a hot dog's moving in
I wandered so aimless life filled with sin
I wouldn't let my dear saviour in
Then Jesus came like a stranger in the night
Praise the Lord I saw the light.
I saw the light I saw the light
No more darkness no more night
Now I'm so happy no sorrow in sight
Praise the Lord I saw the light.
Just like a blind man I wandered along
Worries and fears I claimed for my own
Then like the blind man that God gave back his sight
Praise the Lord I saw the light.
I saw the light I saw the light
No more darkness no more night
Now I'm so happy no sorrow in sight
Praise the Lord I saw the light.
I was a fool to wander and a-stray
Straight is the gate and narrow the way
Now I have traded the wrong for the right
Praise the Lord I saw the light.
I saw the light I saw the light
No more darkness no more night
Now I'm so happy no sorrow in sight
Praise the Lord I saw the light.
I know you tried your best to love me
You smiled when your heart told you to weep
You tried to pretend that you were happy
But last night I heard you crying in your sleep
You gave the best years of your life dear 
And each precious vow you tried to keep
I love you so much I want you happy
But last night I heard you crying in your sleep
Your heart is yearning for an old love
It hurts me to know you are unhappy
But last night I heard you crying in your sleep
You know that you are free to go dear
And don't mind if I start to weep
I know I can never make you happy
Cause last night I heard you crying in your sleep
Oh the rain is slowly fallin',
And my heart is so sore,
Six more miles and leave my darlin',
Never on this earth to meet no more.
Six more miles to the graveyard,
Six more miles, long and sad,
Six more miles and leave my darlin',
Leave the best friend, I ever had.
Oh I hear the train a-comin',
Bringin' my darlin' back home,
Six more miles, to the graveyard,
And I'll be left here all a- lone.
Left her in that lonely church yard,
Left my darlin' alone,
Now I'm sad, my heart is cryin',
As i wander thru life alone.
DID YOU EVER SIT STRAIGHT UP IN BED 
WITH SOMETHIN' A CIRCLIN' ROUND YA HEAD 
AN YA SWAT AT IT AS IT WIZZES BY 
AND IT'S JUST ONE PESKY LITTLE FLY
YOU SHAKE YA HEAD AN TWITCH YA NOSE 
AND SETTLE DOWN TO SWEEP YA FLOORS
AND WHEN YA JUST ABOUT TO DOSE...FLY TROUBLE
BUZZ BUZZ BUZZ GOES THAT BUSY LITTLE FLY 
BUZZ BUZZ BUZZ HE'S TAKIN OFF AN HIDE
YOU ROLL THE PAPER UP NICE AND TIGHT 
AND WAIT AROUND FOR HIM TO LIGHT 
BUT THEIRS A FLY THAT'S A LIVEN RIGHT
BUZZ BUZZ BUZZ
NOW THE TOUGHEST HIDE GROWS ON A MULE 
CAUSE HE'S A BULKY STUBORN FOOL
HE LIKES TO LOOK AT YU AND GLARE 
AN NEVER EVEN MOVE A HAIR
BUT WHEN HIS MUSCLES START TO TWITCH 
AN WHEN HIS TAIL BEGINS TO SWISH
THAT MULE AIN'T BOTHERED WITH AN ITCH...FLY TROUBLE
BUZZ BUZZ BUZZ GOES THAT BUSY LITTLE PEST 
BUZZ BUZZ BUZZ THAT MULE CAN'T GET NO REST
HE SHAKES HIS HEAD AN BATS HIS EYE
AN KICKS HIS HEELS UP TO THE SKY
DID YOU EVER SEE A JASS ACK CRY
BUZZ BUZZ BUZZ
NOW YOU PICK A PERFECT NIGHT IN JUNE
WHEN FLOWERS ARE BLOOMIN BENEATH THE MOON 
AND YA LIGHT OF LOVE IS SHININ' BRIGHT 
AN YOU TELL YA SELF TONIGHTS THE NIGHT
YA BRACE YA SELF AN YA COURAGE GROWS
AN ON YA KNEES WHERE YOU WOULD PROPOSE
WHEN SOMETHIN BIGHTS YOU ON THE NOSE...FLY TROUBLE 
BUZZ BUZZ BUZZ GOES THAT BUSY LITTLE THING 
BUZZ BUZZ BUZZ YOU SWAT AN LOOSE THE RING
YOU FAN THE AIR AS HE GOES BY
AN STICK YA FINGER IN YOUR EYE
HIT EVERYTHING EXCEPT THAT FLY
BUZZ BUZZ BUZZ
You don't dress up in satin,
You don't wear diamond rings,
But I'm satisfied with you.
You look just like an angel but you haven't got wings,
But I'm satisfied with you.
I'd rather have you just the way that you are
Than change you for somebody new.
Maybe I could do better if I reached for a star,
But I'm satisfied with you.
You're not made out of candy
But you're as sweet as you can be
So I'm satisfied with you.
I just can't see no reason why you bother with me,
But I'm satisfied with you.
I often wonder if it's all a mistake;
It's hard to believe that it's true.
But If I'm only dreaming, I sure don't want to wake,
'Cause I'm satisfied with you.
I'm satisfied with you.
I traveled from Texas to old Louisanne
Through valleys, o'er mountains and plains
Both footsore and weary I rested awhile
On the banks of the old Pontchartrain.
The fairest young maiden that I ever saw
Passed by as it started to rain
We both found a shelter beneath the same tree
On the banks of the old Pontchartrain.
We hid from the shower an hour or so
She asked me how long I'd remain
I told her that I'd spend the rest of my days
On the banks of the old Pontchartrain.
I just couldn't tell her that I ran away
From jail on a West Texas plain
I prayed in my heart I would never be found
On the banks of the old Pontchartrain.
Then one day a man put his hand on my arm
And said I must go west again
I left her alone without saying goodbye
On the banks of the old Pontchartrain.
Tonight as I sit here alone in my cell
I know that she's waiting in vain
I'm hoping and praying someday to return
On the banks of the old Pontchartrain
Met my future wife today
And her name is Kathy Mae
Rootie Tootie, (Rootie Tootie)
Rootie Tootie, (Rootie Tootie)
Rootie Tootie, she's my Sunday gal.
Feelin' dandy, doin' swell
My gal is the village bell
Hotsy-totsy (Rootie Tootie)
Super-duper (Rootie Tootie)
Rootie Tootie, she's my Monday gal.
You should see the people stare
When we walk around the square
Bouncy-bouncy, (Rootie Tootie)
Upsy-daisy, (Rootie Tootie)
Rootie Tootie, she's my Tuesday gal.
I'm not jealous, no siree
Just as long as she's with me
Wicky-wacky, (Rootie Tootie)
Humpty-dumpty, (Rootie Tootie)
Rootie Tootie, she's my Wednesday gal.
She's got "purty" eyes of blue
And she thinks I'm "purty", too
Tootsie-wootsie, (Rootie Tootie)
Hunky-dory, (Rootie Tootie)
Rootie Tootie, she's my Thursday gal.
Gonna make that lady mine
When she signs that dotted line
Hinky-dinky, (Rootie Tootie)
Yipsy-doodle, (Rootie Tootie)
Rootie Tootie, she's my Friday gal.
Oh, I can't get you off of my mind
When I try I'm just wastin' my time
Lord I've tried and I've tried
And all night long I've cried
But I can't get you off of my mind.
Didn't think you would leave me behind
But I guess you're the two-timin' kind
Do you think that it's smart to jump from heart to heart
When I can't get you off of my mind.
You believe that a true love is blind
So you fool ev'ry new love you find
You've got stars in your eyes but they can't hide the lies
Oh, I can't get you off my mind.
All you want to do is sit around and pout
And now I got enough and so I'm getting out
I'm leaving now
I'm leaving now
I'm a long gone daddy I don't need you anyhow
I been in the doghouse so doggone long
That when I get a kiss I think that something's wrong
I'll go find a gal that wants to treat me right
You go get yourself a man that wants to fight
You start your jaws a-wagging and it never stop
You never shut your mouth until I blow my top
I remember back when you were nice and sweet
Things have changed, you'd rather fight than eat
I'm a-gonna do some riding on the midnight train
I'm taking everything except my ball and chain
Once I was happy as I could be
But I let a gal make a fool of me
And ever since she let me down
The blues come around when the sun goes down
Oh, the blues come around
Oh the blues come around
Lawd, the blues come around
Ev'ry evenin' when the sun goes down
As long as the sun is in the sky
These doggone blues never make me cry
But ever since she left this town
The blues come around when the sun goes down
I built my castles very high
And then she went and said goodbye
And ever since she tore 'em down
The blues come around when the sun goes down
Once she called me all her own
But now she's gone and I'm alone
And ever evenin' I'm sorrow bound
'Cause the blues come around when the sun goes down
Tonight down here in the valley
I'm lonesome and O how I feel
As I sit here alone in my cabin
I can see your mansion on the hill
Do you recall when we parted
The story to me you revealed
You said you could live without loving
In your loveless mansion on the hill
I've waited all through the years love
To give you a heart true and real
Cause I know you're living in sorrow
In your loveless mansion on the hill
The light shine bright from yer window
The trees stand so silent and still
I know you're alone with your pride dear
In your loveless mansion on the hill
I'll pretend I'm free from sorrow 
Make believe that wrong is right 
Your wedding day will be tomorrow 
But there'll be no teardrops tonight. 
Why, oh why - should you desert me 
Are you doin' this for spite 
If you only want to hurt me 
Then there'll be no teardrops tonight. 
I'll believe that you still love me 
When you wear your veil of white 
But you think that you're above me 
So there'll be no teardrops tonight. 
Shame, oh shame - for what you're doin' 
Other arms will hold you tight 
You don't care whose life you ruin 
But there'll be no teardrops tonight.
I got a feelin' called the blues, oh Lord
Since my baby said goodbye
Lord I don't know what I'll do
All I do is sit and sigh, oh Lord
That last long day she said goodbye
Well lord I thought I would cry
She'll do me, she'll do you
She's got that kind of lovin'
Lord I love to hear her when she calls me sweet da-a-addy
Such a beautiful dream
I hate to think it's all over
I've lost my heart it seems
I've grown so used to you somehow
Well I'm nobody's sugar daddy now
And I'm lo-o-onesome
I got the lovesick blues
Well I'm in love I'm in love with a beautiful gal
That's what's the matter with me
Well I'm in love I'm in love with a beautiful gal
But she don't care about me
Lord I tried and tried, to keep her satisfied
But she just wouldn't stay
So now that she is leavin'
This is all I can say
I got a feelin' called the blues, oh Lord
Since my baby said goodbye
Lord I don't know what I'll do
All I do is sit and sigh, oh Lord
That last long day she said goodbye
Well Lord I thought I would cry
She'll do me, she'll do you
She's got that kind of lovin'
Lord I love to hear her when she calls me sweet da-a-addy
Such a beautiful dream
I hate to think it all over
I've lost my heart it seems
I've grown so used to you somehow
Lord I'm nobody's sugar daddy now
And I'm lo-o-onesome
I got the lovesick blues
I'm a rollin stone all alone and lost
For a life of sin I have paid the cost
When I pass by all the people say
Just another guy on the lost highway
Just a deck of cards and a jug of wine
And a womans lies makes a life like mine
Oh the day we met, I went astray
I started rolling down that lost highway
I was just a lad, nearly 22
Neither good nor bad, just a kid like you
And now I'm lost, too late to pray
Lord I take a cost, oh the lost highway
Now boys don't start to ramblin' round
On this road of sin are you sorrow bound
Take my advice or you'll curse the day
You started rollin' down that lost highway
Like a bird that's lost its mate in flight
I'm alone and oh, so blue tonight
Like a piece of driftwood on the sea
May you never be alone like me.
I believed the lies you told to me
When you whispered, "Dear, I worship thee!"
Now here am I alone and blue
All because I loved no one but you.
I gave up my friends, I left my home
When you promised to be mine alone
Now you're gone, our love could never be
May you never be alone like me.
In the bible, God's own words do say
For ev'ry wrong some day you'll pay
I pray the Lord to set me free
May you never be alone like me.
Well I left my home down on the rural route
I told my paw I'm going steppin out and get the
Honky tonk blues, 
Yeah the honky tonk blues
Well Lord I got 'em, 
I got the ho-on-ky tonk blues.
Well I went to a dance and I wore out my shoes
Woke up this mornin wishin I could lose
Them jumpin honky tonk blues, 
Yeah the honky tonk blues
Well Lord I got 'em, 
I got the ho-on-ky tonk blues.
Well I stopped into every place in town
This city life has really got me down
I got the honky tonk blues, 
Yeah the honky tonk blues
Well Lord I got em, 
got the ho-on-ky tonk blues.
I'm gonna tuck my worries underneath my arm
And scat right back to my pappy's farm
And leave these honky tonk blues, 
Yeah the honky tonk blues
Well Lord I got 'em, 
I got the ho-on-ky tonk blues.
If the wife and I are fussin', brother that's our right
'Cause me and that sweet woman's got a license to fight
Why don't you mind your own business
(Mind your own business)
'Cause if you mind your business, then you won't be mindin' mine.
Oh, the woman on our party line's the nosiest thing
She picks up her receiver when she knows it's my ring
Why don't you mind your own business
(Mind your own business)
Well, if you mind your business, then you won't be mindin' mine.
I got a little gal that wears her hair up high, 
the boys all whistle when she walks by.
why don't you mind your own business 
(Mind your own business)
Well, if you mind your own business, you sure won't be minding mine.
If I want to honky tonk around 'til two or three
Now, brother that's my headache, don't you worry 'bout me.
Just mind your own business
(Mind your own business)
If you mind your business, then you won't be mindin' mine. 
Mindin' other people's business seems to be high-toned
I got all that I can do just to mind my own
Why don't you mind your own business
(Mind your own business)
If you mind your own business, you'll stay busy all the time.
You wore out a brand new trunk
Packin' and unpackin' your junk
Your daddy's mad; He's done got pee-eeved
You're Gonna Change or I'm a-gonna leave.
You're gonna change your way of livin'
Change the things you do
Stop doin' all the things that you oughten too
Your daddy's mad; He's done got pee-eeved
You're Gonna Change or I'm a-gonna leave.
This ain't right and that is wrong
You just keep naggin', all the day long
Its gotta stop, I don't mean plea-ease
Now, You're Gonna Change or I'm a-gonna leave.
The way to keep a woman happy
And make her do what's right
Is love her ev'ry mornin', bawl her out at night
Your daddy's mad; He's done got pee-eeved
Now, You're Gonna Change or I'm a-gonna leave.
Ev'ry time you get mad
You pack your rags and go back to dad
You tell him lies he don't belie-ieve
Now, You're Gonna Change or I'm a-gonna leave.
Tonight my heart is bowed in sorrow
I can't keep the tears from my eyes
My Son Calls Another Man Daddy
The right to his love, I've been denied.
My Son Calls Another Man Daddy
He'll ne'er know my name nor my face
God only knows how it hurts me
For another to be in my place.
Each night I laid there in prison
I pictured a future so bright
For he was the one ray of sunshine
That showed thru the darkest of nights.
Today his mother shares a new love
She just couldn't stand my disgrace
My Son Calls Another Man Daddy
And longs for the love he can't replace.
I have the invitation that you sent me
You wanted me to see you change your name
I couldn't stand to see you wed another
But dear I hope you're happy just the same
Wedding bells are ringing in the chapel
That should be ringing out for you and me
Down the aisle with someone else you're walking
Those wedding bell will never ring for me
I planned a little cottage in the valley
I even bought a little band of gold
I thought some day I'd place it on your finger
But now the future looks so dark and cold
Wedding bells are ringing in the chapel
I hear the children laughing out with glee
At home alone I hang my head in sorrow
Those wedding bells will never ring for me
I fancy that I see a bunch of roses
A blossom from an orange tree in your hair
And while the organ plays I love you truly
Please let me pretend that I am there
Wedding bells are ringing in the chapel
Ever since the day you set me free
I knew someday that you would wed another
But wedding bells will never ring for me
Each year on Mother's day
The rose I wore was red
But today I'm saying my first prayer
Mama's lying on her dying bed.
I've just told Mama goodbye
Mother's day has turned to night
Like the flowers in May, she withered away
And my red rose is turning white.
This is the dreaded hour
We all must face someday
Yet there's consolation in my heart
She will bloom in the Master's bouquet.
Her time has come to go
And there's nothing I can do
Only hold her hand and say goodbye
Mama's day with her children is through.
I've just told Mama goodbye
And knelt beside her bed
I heard her say, "I'll meet you someday,
Where the white roses turn to red."
Hear that lonesome whippoorwill
He sounds too blue to fly
The midnight train is whining low
I'm so lonesome I could cry
I've never seen a night so long
When time goes crawling by
The moon just went behind the clouds
To hide its face and cry
Did you ever see a robin weep
When leaves begin to die?
Like me, he's lost the will to live
I'm so lonesome I could cry
The silence of a falling star
Lights up a purple sky
And as I wonder where you are
I'm so lonesome I could cry
For years we both have lived on pride, dear
And we agree that love is gone
Why, oh why do we keep tryin'
A House Without Love is not a home. 
The lovelight in your eyes has faded
And I'm contented just to roam
We slaved to gain a worthless treasure
A House Without Love is not a home.
No matter where our footsteps wander
I know we'll both be all alone
With the pride that came between us
A House Without Love is not a home. 
The simple things have gone forever
We wanted wealth to call our own
And now we've reached the hour of parting
A House Without Love is not a home.
I Just Don't Like This Kind Of Livin'
I'm tired of doin' all the givin'
I give my all and sit and yearn
And get no lovin' in return
And I Just Don't Like This Kind Of Livin'.
Why do we stay together
We always fuss and fight
You ain't never known to be wrong
And I ain't never been right;
Tell me where you think we're goin'
'Cause I ain't got no way of knowin'
When things go wrong, you go your way
You leave me here, to pay and pay
And I Just Don't Like This Kind Of Livin'.
I just don't like the things you're doin'
Your evil heart will be your ruin
When things start runnin' smooth and free
You haul right off and you pick on me
And I just don't like this way of livin'.
They say the road of love is long
It's rocky and it's rough
But if this road don't start to get smooth
I've traveled it long enough;
Why don't you act a little older
And get that chip off of your shoulder
I've told you once, now I'll tell you twice
You better start to treat me nice
'Cause I just don't like this way of livin'.
Yea! My Bucket's Got A Hole In It
Yea! My Bucket's Got A Hole In It
Yea! My Bucket's Got A Hole In It
I can't buy no beer. 
Well I'm standin' on a corner - With a bucket in my hand
I'm waitin' for a woman - That ain't got no man. 
'Cause My Bucket's Got A Hole In It
Yea! My Bucket's Got A Hole In It
Yea! My Bucket's Got A Hole In It
I can't buy no beer. 
Well, I went upon the mountain - I looked down in the sea
I seen the crabs and the fishes - Doin' the be-bop-bee. 
'Cause My Bucket's Got A Hole In It
Yea! My Bucket's Got A Hole In It
Yea! My Bucket's Got A Hole In It
I can't buy no beer. 
Well, there ain't no use - of me workin' so hard
When I got a woman - in the boss man's yard. 
'Cause My Bucket's Got A Hole In It
Yea! My Bucket's Got A Hole In It
Yea! My Bucket's Got A Hole In It
I can't buy no beer. 
Well, me and my baby - we just bought a Ford
And now we sit together - on the running board.
'Cause My Bucket's Got A Hole In It
Yea! My Bucket's Got A Hole In It
Yea! My Bucket's Got A Hole In It
I can't buy no beer.
I went down to the river to watch the fish swim by
But I got to the river so lonesome I wanted to die, oh Lord
And then I jumped in the river, but the doggone river was dry
She's long gone, and now I'm lonesome blue
I had me a woman who couldn't be true
She made me for my money and she made me blue
A man needs a woman that he can lean on
But my leanin' post is done left and gone
She's long gone, and now I'm lonesome blue
I'm gonna find me a river, one that's cold as ice
And when I find me that river, Lord I'm gonna pay the price, oh Lord
I'm goin' down in it three times, but Lord I'm only comin' up twice
She's long gone, and now I'm lonesome blue
She told me on Sunday she was checkin' me out
Long about Monday she was nowhere about
And here it is Tuesday, ain't had no news
I got them gone but not forgotten blues
She's long gone, and now I'm lonesome blue
Well, Why Don't You Love Me like you used to do
How come you treat me like a worn out shoe
My hair's still curly and my eyes are still blue
Why Don't You Love Me Like You Used To Do.
Ain't had no lovin' like a huggin' and a kissin'
in a long, long while
We don't get nearer or further or closer
than a country mile;
Why don't you spark me like you used to do
And say sweet nothin's like you used to coo
I'm the same old trouble that you've always been through
So, Why Don't You Love Me like you used to do.
Well, why don't you be just like you used to be
How come you find so many faults with me
Somebody's changed so let me give you a clue
Why Don't You Love Me like you used to do.
Ain't had no lovin' like a huggin' and a kissin'
in a long, long while
We don't get nearer or further 
than a country mile;
Why don't you say the things you used to say
What makes you treat me like a piece of clay
My hair's still curly and my eyes are still blue
Why Don't You Love Me like you used to do.
What's the use to deny we've been living a lie
That we should have admitted before
We were just victims of a half-hearted love
So why should we try anymore
The vows that we make are only to break
We drift like a wave from the shore
The kisses we steal we know are not real
So why should we try anymore
The dreams that we knew can never come true
They're gone to return no more
False love like ours fades with the flowers 
So why should we try anymore
Our story's so old again has been told
On the past let's close the door
And smile don't regret but live and forget
There's no use to try anymore
Too many parties and too many pals will break your heart someday
Too many boyfriends and sociable sals may drive your sweetheart away
Gentlemen of the jury the judge's speech began
The scene was a crowded courtroom and the judge a stern old man
This prisoner here before you is a social enemy
A lady of the evening and you know the penalty
Her eyes reflect the nightlife her cheeks they're red with paint
But I knew her mother gentlemen why her mother was a saint
Now I know that she's not like her and yet she might have been
If it hadn't been for pettin' parties cigarettes and gin
We took the night life off the streets and brought it in our own homes
While girls beguiled with lipstick danced to saxophones
We opened up the underworld to the ones we loved so well
So tell me gentlemen is it right to send her to a cell
If she drinks while you taught her and if she smokes you showed her how
So gentlemen do you think it's right to condemn her now
And when you're in that juryroom just remember there and then
That for every fallen woman there's a hundred fallen men
And before you render a verdict on what this girl has done
Just remember there's a man to blame and that man might be your son
Now gentlemen that's my story my testimony stands
This girl is my own daughter and the case is in your hands
Those Broadway roses and prevalent sounds at too many parties and too many pals
Should you go first and I remain to walk the road alone
I'll live in mem'ry's garden dear with happy days we've known
In spring I'll wait for roses red when fades the lilacs bloom
And in early fall when brown leaves fall I'll catch a glimpse of you
Should you go first and I remain for battles to be fought
Each thing you've touched along the way will be a hallowed spot
I'll hear your voice I'll see your smile though blindly I may grope
The mem'ry of your helping hand will buoy me on with hope
Beyond the sunset oh blissful morning when with our Saviour heaven is begun
Earth's toiling ended oh glorious dawning beyond the sunset when day is done
Should you go first and I remain to finish with the scroll
No lessening shadows shall ever creep in to make this life seem droll
We've known so much of happiness we've had our cup of joy
And memory is one gift of God that death cannot destroy
I want to know each step you take that I may walk the same
For someday down that lonely road you'll hear me call your name
Should you go first and I remain one thing I'll have you do
Walk slowly down that long long path for soon I'll follow you
In that fair homeland we'll know no parting beyond the sunset for evermore
I was walking in Savannah past a church decayed and dim
when slowly through the window came a plaintive funeral hymn
With my sympathy awakened and a wonder quickly grew,
'til I found myself envired in a little colored pew.
Out front a colored couple sat and sorrowed yet a while.
On the altar was a casket and in the casket was a child.
I could picture him while living, curly hair protruding lips, 
why I'd seen perhaps a thousand in my hurried southern trips.
Rose a sad, old colored preacher from his little wooden desk
with a manner sort of awkward and countenance grotesque.
The simplicity and shrewdness in his Ethiopian face, showed the wisdom and ignorance of a crushed, undying race.
And he said, "Now don't be weepin' for this pretty bit of clay,
for the little boy who lived there has done gone and run away.
He was doing very finely and he appreciates your love, 
but his shore 'nough father wanted him in the big house up above.
The Lord didn't give you that baby, by no hundred thousand miles, 
he just thought you need some sunshine and he lent it for a while. 
And he let you keep and love it til your hearts were bigger grown
and these silver tears you're shedding now, is just interest on the loan.
Just think my poor dear mourners creeping long on sorrow's way,
what a blessed picnic this here baby got today.
Your good fathers and good mothers crowd the little fella round
While the angels tend the garden of the big plantation ground.
And his eyes they brightly sparkle at the pretty things he view
but a tear came and he whispered, "I want my parents too".
Then the Angel's chief musicians teach that little boy a song
says if only they be faithful, they'll soon be comin' long.
And so my poor dear mourners let your hearts with Jesus rest
and don't go to criticizn' the one what knows the best.
He has give us many comforts, he's got the right to take away
To the Lord be praise and glory, forever, let us pray.
I went to the country - just the other day
To see my Uncle Bill and sorta pass the time away
I asked him how he'd been - since last, I'd passed his way
He rubbed his chin - here's what he had to say.
"My wife's been sick - the young'ns, too
And I'm durn near - down with the flu
The cow's gone dry - and them hens won't lay
But - we're still a-livin' - so EVER'THING'S Okay.
The hogs took the cholera and they've all done died
The bees got mad - and they left the hive
The weevils got the corn and the rain rotted the hay
But - we're still a-livin' - so EVER'THING'S Okay.
The porch rotted down - that's more expense
The durned old mule - he tore down the fence
The mortgage is due and - I can't pay
But - we're still a-livin' - so EVER'THING'S Okay.
The cow broke in the field and eat up the beans
The durn rabbits - they got the turnip greens
And my Ma-in-law just moved in to stay
But - we're still a-livin' - so EVER'THING'S Okay.
My land's so poor - so hard and "yeller"
You have to set on a sack of fetilizer to raise an "umbreller"
And it rains out here - nearly ever' day
But - we're still a-livin' - so EVER'THING'S Okay.
The well's gone dry and I have to tote the water
Up from the spring - about a mile and a quarter
My helper, he quit - for the lack of pay
But - we're still a-livin' - so EVER'THING'S Okay.
The house it leaks - it needs a new top
When it rains - it wets ever'thing we got
The chimney fell down - just yesterday
But - we're still a-livin' - so EVER'THING'S Okay.
The corn meals gone and the meat's run out
Got nothin' to kill to put in the smokehouse
The preacher's comin' Sunday - to spend the day
But - we're still a-livin' - so EVER'THING'S Okay.
The canned stuff's spoiled - else the jar's got broke
And all we got left is one old Billy goat
We're gonna have a new baby about the first of May
But - we're still a-livin' - so EVER'THING'S Okay.
My crop it rotted - in the ground
I asked for another loan but the banker turned me down
But - we're still a-livin' and we're prayin' for better days
So - after all, ever'thing's in purty good shape."
If today the sun should set on all my hopes and cares
There is one smiling face the gods would see
'Cus she'll walk along beside me up the golden stairs
No, they'll never never take her love from me.
What a fool I was to go and break the trust she gave
And see her love turn into sympathy
It's the one regret I'll carry with me to my grave
Oh, they'll never ever take her love from me.
I'm so thankful for each golden hour of happiness
That we shared together in the used to be
Someone else's arms may hold her now in fond caress
But they'll never never take her love from me.
I thought I'd make her happy if I stepped aside
But I knew her love would never set me free
And even on the morning she became another's bride
I said they'll never never take her love from me.
Ev'rybody's lonesome for somebody else
But nobody's lonesome for me
Ev'rybody's thinkin' 'bout somebody else
But nobody thinks about me
When the time rolls around for me to lay down and die
I bet I'll have to go and hire me someone to cry
Ev'rybody's lonesome for somebody else
nobody is lonesome for me.
Ev'rybody's longin' for somebody else
But nobody's lonesome for me
Ev'rybody's dreamin' about somebody else
But nobody dreams about me
All I need is a bride who want's a big-hearted groom
I wouldn't care if she come ridin' in on a broom
Ev'rybody's lonesome for somebody else
No-bod-o-dy lonesome for me.
Ev'rybody's pinin' for somebody else
But nobody's lonesome for me
Ev'rybody's crazy 'bout somebody else
But nobody's crazy 'bout me
Oh, I shined up my shoes and then I slicked down my hair
Put on my Sunday suit, but I ain't goin' nowhere
Ev'rybody's lonesome for somebody else
But nobody's lonesome for me.
Ev'rybody's yearnin' for somebody else
But nobody's lonesome for me
Ev'rybody's fallin' for somebody else
But nobody's fallin' for me
Now I ain't had a kiss since I fell out of my crib
It looks to me like I been cheated out of my rib
Ev'rybody's lonesome for somebody else
No-bod-o-dy lonesome for me.
When my baby moved out and the blues moved in
There wasn't nothin' I could do
But mosey around with my head in my hands
Lord what am I comin' to
I just keep Moanin'
Moa-oanin' the blues.
I wrote a nice, long letter
Sayin' mama please come home
Your dad-ad-dy is lon-one-some
And all I do is moan ...
I been lovin' that gal for so doggone long
I can't afford to lose her now
I thought I was right but I must of been wrong
'Cause my head is startin' to bow
And now I'm Moanin'
Moa-oanin' The Blues.
If you want a good gal to stay around
You gotta treat her nice and kind
If you do her wrong she'll leave this tonw
And you'll almost lose your mind
Then you'll moanin'; Moa-oanin' The Blues.
Aw! baby, baby, baby
Honey baby, please come home
Your dad-ad-dy is lon-one-some and all I do is moan
I promise you baby that I'll be good
And I'll never be bad no more
I'm sittin' here waitin' for you right now
To walk through that front door
Then I'll stop moanin'; Moa-oanin' The Blues.
A little girl prayed at the close of the day, 
Cause her daddy had gone far away,
On her little face was a look of despair,
I stood there and listened, and I heard this prayer
My mommie says daddy has brought us to shame
And I'm never no more to mention his name
Lord take me and lead me and hold to my hand
Oh heavenly Father help me understand
You know friends I wonder--
Just how many homes are broken tonight
And just how many tears are shed 
By some little word of anger
That never should have been said
I'd like to tell you a story 
Of a family I once knew.
We'll call them Mary and William 
And their little daughter Sue
Now Mary was just a plain mother
And Bill was just a usual dad
And they had their little family quarrels 
(like everybody else)
But neither one really got mad
Then one day something happened 
It was nothing of course
But one word led to another 
And the last word led to a divorce
Now here were two grown up people
Who failed to use common sense
They strengthened their own selfish pride 
At little Sue's expense
You know she didn't ask to be brought to 
this world
To drift from pillar to post
But a divorce never stops to consider
The ones it hurts the most
There's be a lot more honest loving 
In this wicked ole world today
If just a few parted parents
Could hear little Sue say
Take me and lead me and hold to my hand
Oh heavenly Father, help me understand
I tried so hard,my dear,to show that you're my every dream
Yet you're afraid each thing I do is just some evil scheme
A memory from your lonesome past keeps us so far apart
Why can't I free your doubtful mind and melt your cold, cold heart?
Another love before my time made your heart sad and blue
And so my heart is paying now for things I didn't do
In anger, unkind words are said that make the teardrops start
Why can't I free your doubtful mind and melt your cold, cold heart?
You'll never know how much it hurts to see you sit and cry
You know you need and want my love, yet you're afraid to try
Why do you run and hide from life, to try it just ain't smart
Why can't I free your doubtful mind and melt your cold, cold heart?
There was a time when I believed that you belonged to me
But now I know your heart is shackled to a memory
The more I learn to care for you, the more we drift apart
Why can't I free your doubtful mind and melt your cold, cold heart?
Well when I woke up this mornin',
There was a note upon my door,
Said don't make me no coffee Babe,
'cause I won't be back no more,
And that's all she wrote, Dear John,
I've sent your saddle home.
Now Jonah got along in the belly of the whale,
Daniel in the lion's den,
But I know a guy that didn't try to get along,
And he won't get a chance again,
And that's all she wrote, Dear John,
I've fetched your saddle home.
Well she didn't forward no address,
Nor she didn't say goodbye,
All she said was if you get blue,
Just hang your little head and cry,
And that's all she wrote, Dear John,
I've sent your saddle home.
Now my gal's short and stubby,
She's strong as she can be,
But if that little old gal of mine,
Ever get's a-hold of me,
That's all she wrote, Dear John,
I've sent your saddle home.
Now Jonah got along in the belly of the whale,
Daniel in the lion's den,
But I know a man that didn't try to get along,
And he won't get a chance again,
And that's all she wrote, Dear John,
I've fetched your saddle home.
Now I went down to the bank this morning,
The cashier said with a grin,
I feel so sorry for you Hank,
But your wife has done been in,
And that's all she wrote, Dear John,
I've sent your saddle home.
The old maid's waitin' for leap year to come
The crooner's Just Waitin' to sing
The old cow's standin' by the Bull Durham sign
Just a-Waitin' for the grass to turn green.
The bar-fly's waitin' for an easy mark
'N' the hitch-hiker's waitin' for a ride
The life-termer's waitin' for a prison break
The beachcomber's waitin' for the ride. (tide)
Farmer's daughter's waitin' for the salesman
To take her into town
The city slicker's waitin' for the country boy
To lay all his money down.
You know ev'rything comes to a standstill
Nothin' seems to make a turn
Worm must be waitin' for the early bird
I guess the early bird's waitin' for the worm.
Nobody wants to do nothin'
Just Waitin' to get a finger in the pie
Waitin' for a call from a big quiz show
Or hopin' and a-waitin'for some rich uncle to die. (deleted 'and')
Katy, she's waitin' at the garden gate
The moonshiner's waitin' at the still
'N' the gambler's still waitin' for that Ace in the hole
I guess Jack's still waitin' for Jill.
Ev'rybody's waitin' for som'thin'
Nothing seems to turn out right
'Cause the night shift's waitin' for mornin'
And the burglar Just Waitin' for night.
The congregation's waitin' for the preacher
Preacher Just Waitin' for the groom
The groom's Just Waitin' for the June bride
And the bride's Just Waitin' for June.
Sunflow'rs waitin' for the sunshine
Violets Just Waitin' for dew
Bees Just Waitin' for honey
And, honey, -- I'm -- Just -- Waitin' -- for -- you.
You'll meet many just like me upon life's busy street
With shoulders stooped and heads bowed low and eyes that stare in defeat
Or souls that live within the past where sorrow plays all parts
Where a living death is all that's left for men with broken hearts
You have no right to be the judge to criticize and condemn
Just think but for the grace of God it would be you instead of him
One careless step a thoughtless deed and then the misery starts
And to those who weep death comes cheap these men with broken hearts
Oh so humble you should be when they come passing by
For it's written that the greatest men never get too big to cry
Some lose faith in love and life when sorrow shoots her darts
And with hope all gone they walk alone these men with broken hearts
You've never walked in that man's shoes or saw things through his eyes
Or stood and watched with helpless hands while the heart inside you dies
Some were propers some were kings and some were masters of the arts
But in their shame they're all the same these men with broken hearts
Life sometimes can be so cruel that a heart will pray for death
God why must these living dead know pain with every breath
So help your brother along the road no matter where he starts
For the God that made you made them too these men with broken hearts
Today I passed you on the street
And my heart fell at your feet
I can't help it if I'm still in love with you.
Somebody else stood by your side
And he looked so satisfied
I can't help it if I'm still in love with you.
A picture from the past came slowly stealing
As I brushed your arm and walked so close to you
Then suddenly I got that old time feeling
I can't help it if I'm still in love with you.
It's hard to know another's lips will kiss you
And hold you just the way I used to do
Oh, heaven only knows how much I miss you
I can't help it if I'm still in love with you.
I know there's never been a man in the awful shape I'm in
I can't even spell my name, my heads in such a spin
To-day I tried to eat a steak with a big old table-spoon
You got me chasin' Rabbits, walkin' on my hands
...And Howlin' At The Moon.
Well, I took one look at you and it almost drove me mad
And then I even went and lost what little sense I had
Now I can't tell the day from night, I'm crazy as a loon
You got me chasin' Rabbits, pullin' out my hair and Howlin' At The Moon.
Some friends of mine asked me to go out on a huntin' spree
'Cause there ain't a hound dog in this state that can hold a light to me
I eat three bones for dinner today, then tried to tree a 'Coon
You got me chasin' Rabbits, scratchin' fleas and Howlin' At The Moon.
I rode my horse to town to day and a gas pump we did pass
I pulled 'im up and I hollered WHOA!, said fill 'im up with gas
The man picked up a monkey wrench and WHAM!, he changed my tune
You got me chasin' Rabbits, spittin' out teeth and Howlin' At The Moon.
I never thought in this old world a fool could fall so hard
But honey baby, when I fell the whole world must have jarred
I think I'd quit my doggish ways if you'd take me for your groom
You got me chasin Rabbits, pickin' out rings and Howlin' At The Moon
Say hey, good lookin' - what ya got cookin'?
How's about cooking somethin' up with me?
Hey, sweet baby - don't you think maybe
We can find us a brand new recipe?
I got a hot rod Ford, and a two dollar bill
And I know a spot right over the hill
There's soda pop and the dancing's free
So if you wanna have fun, come along with me
Say hey, good lookin' - what ya got cookin'?
How's about cooking somethin' up with me?
I'm free and ready, so we can go steady.
How's about saving all your time for me?
No more lookin' - I know I been tookin'
Hows about keepin' steady company?
I'm gonna throw my date book over the fence
And buy me one for five or ten cents
I'll keep it till it's covered with age
Cause I'm writin' your name down on every page
Say hey, good lookin' - what ya got cookin'?
How's about cooking somethin' up with me?
I could say it's over now 
That I was glad to see you go
I could hate you for theway I'm feelin'
My lips could tell a lie, but my heart would know
It's a sin to make me cry
When you know I love you so 
I could tell my heart that I don't miss you
My lips could tell a lie, but my heart would know
I could give you all the blame
But I'm sure the truth would show
I could tell this world I've found a new love
My lips could tell a lie, but my heart would know
I can't fool my cryin' heart
'Cause it knows I need you so
I could tell my heart I'm glad we parted
My lips could tell a lie, but my heart would know
Listen poor sinner; you're driftin' away 
From the Dear Saviour; who's pleading today
What will you do; when the Saviour ain't nigh
When the Pale Horse and his rider goes by?
The time now ain't long; when the Saviour will come
Then you'll be judged; by the deeds you have done
On that judgement day; you'll weep and you'll cry
When the Pale Horse and his rider goes by?
When that trumpet sounds; on the sinners below
Not even the angels; in heaven will know
Then's when you'll wish; you had Jesus nigh
When the Pale Horse and his rider goes by?
Won't you redeem; your poor wicked soul
You can't pay your way; with Silver and Gold
If you're not saved; you'll be lost in the night
When the Pale Horse and his rider goes by?
Around me many are building
Homes of beauty and wealth
But what of a home in Heaven
Where will you live after death
Are you building a Home in Heaven
To live in when this life is o'er
Will you move to that beautiful city
And live with Christ ever more.
Long is the road that leads you
To that beautiful home up there
Is work on your home completed
Death may be lingering near.
Are you ready for His coming
Have you been true all along
Have you finished your building in Glory
Will you move to this Heavenly Home.
I can settle down and be doin' just fine
Til' I hear an old train rollin' down the line
Then I hurry straight home and pack
And if I didn't go, I believe I'd blow my stack
I love you baby, but you gotta understand
When the Lord made me, He made a Ramblin' Man
Some folks might sa-ay that I'm no good
That I wouldn't settle down if I could
But when that open ro-oad starts to callin' me
There's somethin' o'er the hill that I gotta see
Sometimes it's har-rd but you gotta understand
When the Lord made me, He made a Ra-amblin' Man
I love to see the towns a-passin' by
And to ride these rails, 'neath God's blue sky
Let me travel this land from the mountains to the sea
'Cause that's the life I believe, He meant for me
And when I'm go-one and at my grave you stand
Just say God called home your Ra-amblin' Man
In the world's mighty gallery of pictures
Hang the scenes that're painted from life
There's pictures of love and of passion
And there's pictures of keys and of strife
There hung pictures of youth and of beauty
Of old age and a blushing young bride
They all hung on the wall but the saddest of all
Are the pictures from life's other side
Just a picture from life's other side
Someone has fell by the way
A life has gone out with the tide
That might have been happy some day
There's a poor old mother at home
She's watching and waiting alone
Just longing to hear from a loved one so dear
Just a picture from life's other side
The first scene is that of a gambler
Who had lost all of his money at play
And he drowses dead mother's ring from his finger
Which she wore long ago on her wedding day
It's his last earthly treasure but he stakes it
Then bows his head that his shame he might hide
But when they lifted his head they found he was dead
That's just a picture from life's other side
Now the last scene is that by the river
Of a heartbroken mother and baby
As the harbor lights shine and they shiver
On an outcast, soon no one will save
And yet she was once a true woman
She was somebody's darling and pride
God help her she leaps, oh there's no one to weep
It's just a picture from life's other side
Now friend if you'll just listen to me you'll get some good hard earned advice
I don't aim to meddle in your business I'm just tryin' to save you an awful price
Now you see these teeth that I ain't got and these knots on my bald head
I'll guarantee you boys I didn't get them there lyin' at home in the bed
Now take the smart aleck in any town of him folks want no part
He acts like his head was only made to hold his ears apart
Now he might like what I'm bout to say and my words might make him sore
But I'm just tryin' to be helpful cause I've been down that road before
To bully folks and play mean tricks was once my pride and joy
Till one day I was toted home and mama didn't know her little boy
My head was swelled up so doggone big I couldn't get it through my front door
Now I ain't just talkin' to hear myself cause I've been down that road before
A little fellow about my size got tired of being pushed about
So he went to work and when he got through he'd knocked every one of my teeth out
One time too many I'd rubbed him wrong and he evened up the score
Now that's what happens when you get too big for your britches
And I've been down that road before
Now when you get to thinkin' you're really smart
There's always somebody smarter than you
And no matter how much you boast and brag you can still learn a thing or two
Go get you some treatments just like I've had and you won't hanker for more
I really learned the meaning of living and loving I've been down that road before
Now the man that walks this rocky road usually gets just what he deserves
Cause he's just a helpless servant to a master that he serves
Now I've learned to slow my temper down and not to pick no scraps no more
Boys it's a lot easier on the head and eyes I've been down that road before
I've just been to heaven with someone so true I dreamed about mama last night
She read me the Bible like she used to do I dreamed about mama last night
She never close her eyes to sleep till we were all in bed
And on party nights when we come home she often sat and read
We little thought about it then for we were young and gay
Just how much mama worried when we children were away
We only knew she never slept when we were out at night
That she waited just to know that we'd all come home alright
Why sometimes when we'd stay away till one or two or three
It seemed to us that mama heard the turnin' of the key
For always when we'd step aside she'd call and we'd reply
But we were all too young back then to understand the reason why
Until the last one had returned she'd always keep a light
For mama couldn't sleep until she kissed us all goodnight
She had to know that we were safe before she went to rest
She seemed to fear that the world might harm the ones that she loved the best
And once she told me when you're grown to women and to men
Perhaps I'll sleep the whole night through I may be different then
And so it seemed that night and day we knew a mother's care
That always when we got back home we'd find her waitin' there
Then came the night that we were called together round her bed
The children're all with you now the kindly doctor said
And in her eyes the gleam again that old time tender light
That told that she's just been waitin' to know that we were alright
She smiled that old familiar smile and prayed to God to keep
Her children safe from harm throughout the years tand then she went to sleep
My dream is a treasure that I'll always keep I dreamed about mama last night
I could shame you 'til you hide your face
And drag you right down in disgrace
But what good would it do
I know I'd still want you.
I could tell the world you're doin' wrong
That I was stringin' you along
And if it all were true
I know I'd still want you.
The world with me might sympathize
When I got thru with all my lies
But I'd be just as blue
'Cause my heart would still want you-ooo-oo 
Cry, oh, lord.
I could tell my friends I threw you down
And slander your name all over town
But what good would it do
I know I'd still want you.
If I said I'm happy to be free
The only one I'd fool is me
Because it isn't true
I know I'd still want you.
What's the use to say that you're no good
When I'd crawl back if I could
No matter what you do
I know I'd still want you-ooo-oo
Cry, oh, lord.
I could smile and say that I don't care
And then go home and pull my hair
But what good would it do
I know I'd still want you.
I could say that someone put me wise 
And get revenge by telling lies
But when I got all thru
I know I'd still want you.
If the things I said was to break your heart
I'd be the first to take your part
'Cause if all these lies were true
I know I'd still want you-oooo-oo
Cry, oh, lord.
I was ridin' number nine
Headin' south from Caroline
I heard that lonesome whistle blow
Got in trouble had to roam
Left my gal and left my home
I heard that lonesome whistle blow
Just a kid actin' smart
I went and broke my darlin's heart
I guess I was too young to know
They took me off the Georgia Main
Locked me to a ball and chain
I heard that lonesome whistle blow
All alone I bear the shame
I'm a number not a name
I heard that lonesome whistle blow
All I do is sit and cry
When the ev'nin' train goes by
I heard that lonesome whistle blow
I'll be locked here in this cell
Til my body's just a shell
And my hair turns whiter than snow
I'll never see that gal of mine
Lord, I'm in Georgia doin' time
I heard that lonesome whistle blow
You thought she'd care for you and so you acted smart
Go on an break, you Crazy Heart
You lived on promises I knew would fall apart
Go on and break you Crazy Heart.
You never would admit you were mis-tak-en
You didn't even know, the chances you were takin'
I knew you couldn't win, I told you from the start
Go on and break you Crazy Heart.
I knew you'd wake up and find her missin'
I tried my best to warn you, but you wouldn't listen
You told me I was wrong, you thought that you were smart
Go on an break you Crazy Heart.
If you love me half as much as I love you
You wouldn't worry me half as much as you do
You're nice to me when there's no one else around
You only build me up to let me down
If you missed me half as much as I miss you
You wouldn't stay away half as much as you do
I know that I would never be this blue
If you only loved me half as much as I love you
If you love me half as much as I love you
You wouldn't worry me half as much as you do
You're nice to me when there's no one else around
You only build me up to let me down
If you missed me half as much as I miss you
You wouldn't stay away half as much as you do
I know that I would never be this blue
If you only loved me half as much as I love you
If you're lovin' me like i'm lovin' you
Baby, we're really in love
If you're happy with me like i'm happy with you
Old cupid just gave us a shove 
If you're thinkin' of me like i'm thinkin' of you
Then i know what you're thinkin' of
If you're lovin' me like i'm lovin' you
Baby, we're really in love.
I run around in circles
And turn in fire alarms
I'm nutty as a fruitcake
When you're not in my arms
If you're meant for me like i'm meant for you
Baby, we fit like a glove
If you're lovin' me like i'm lovin' you
Baby, we're really in love.
If you're lovin' me like i'm lovin' you
Baby, we're really in love.
If you're countin' on me like i'm countin' on you
Old cupid just gave us a shove
If you're dreamin' of me like i'm dreamin' of you
Then i know what you're dreamin' of
If you're lovin' me like i'm lovin' you
Baby, we're really in love.
My folks think i've gone crazy
And i don't feel too sure
And yet there's nothin' wrong with me
That weddin' bells won't cure
If you go for me like i go for you
Baby, we fit like a glove
If you're lovin' me like i'm lovin' you
Baby, we're really in love.
You've known so long that you were wrong
But still you had your way
You told her lies and alibis
And hurt her more each day
But now your conscience bothers you
You've reached your journey's end
You're asking me for sympathy
I'm Sorry For You, My Friend.
You laughed inside each time she cried
You tried to make her blue
She tagged along through right and wrong
Because she worshipped you
You know that you're the one to blame
There's no use to pretend
Today's the day you start to pay
I'm Sorry For You, My Friend.
Today as she walked arm in arm
At someone else's side
It made you stop and realize
That time has turned the tide
You should have known you'd be alone
'Cause cheaters never win
You tried and lost, now pay the cost
I'm Sorry For You, My Friend.
Darling let's turn back my years and go back to yesterday
Let's pretend that time has stopped and I didn't go away
We had our love to make us happy it wasn't meant to bring us tears
Love like ours should never die so darling let's turn back the years
We had our love to make us happy...
You're Window Shoppin'
Just Window Shoppin'
You're only lookin' around
You're not buyin'
You're just tryin'
To find the best deal in town. 
You give away your kisses
But you never give your heart
To anyone who's fool enough to fall ...
You don't feel love
You don't want real love
You're Window Shoppin' that's all.
Goodbye Joe me gotta go me oh my oh
Me gotta go pole the pirogue down the bayou
My Yvonne the sweetest one me oh my oh
Son of a gun we'll have big fun on the bayou
Jambalaya and a crawfish pie and fil gumbo
Cause tonight I'm gonna see my ma cher amio
Pick guitar fill fruit jar and be gay-o
Son of a gun we'll have big fun on the bayou
Thibodaux Fontaineaux the place is buzzin'
Kinfolk come to see Yvonne by the dozen
Dress in style and go hog wild me oh my oh
Son of a gun we'll have big fun on the bayou
Settle down far from town get me a pirogue
And I'll catch all the fish in the bayou
Jambalaya and a crawfish pie...
Later on, swap my mon, get me a pirogue
And I'll catch all the fish on the bayou
Swap my mon, to buy Yvonne what she need-oh
Son of a gun we'll have big fun on the bayou
Jambalaya and a crawfish pie..
You sing loud and I'll sing louder tonight we're settin' the woods on fire
You're my gal and I'm your feller dress up in your frock of yeller
I'll look swell but you'll look sweller settin' the woods on fire
We'll take in all the honky tonks tonight we're havin' fun
We'll show the folks a brand new dance that never has been done
I don't care who thinks we're silly you'll be daffy and I'll be dilly
We'll order up two bowls of chili settin' the woods on fire
I'll gas up my hot rod stoker we'll get hotter than a poker
You'll be broke but I'll be broker tonight we're settin' the woods on fire
We'll sit close to one another up one street and down the other
We'll have us a time oh brother settin' the woods on fire
We'll put aside a little time to fix a flat or two
My tires and tubes are doin' fine but the air is showin' through
You clap hands and I'll start bowin' we'll do all the laws allowin'
Tomorrow I'll be right back plowin' settin' the woods on fire
Now you're lookin' at a man that's gettin' kind-a mad
I had lot's of luck but it's all been bad
No matter how I struggle and strive
I'll never get out of this world alive
My fishin' pole's broke the creek is full of sand
My woman run away with another man
No matter how I struggle and strive
I'll never get out of this world alive
A distant uncle passed away and left me quite a batch
And I was livin'g high until that fatal day
A lawyer proved I wasn't born
I was only hatched
Ev'rything's again' me and it's got me down
If I jumped in the river I would prob'ly drown
No matter how I struggle and strive
I'll never get out of this world alive
These shabby shoes I'm wearin' all the time
Are full of holes and nails
And brother if I stepped on a worn out dime
I bet a nickel I could tell you if it was heads or tails
I'm not gonna worry wrinkles in my brow
'Cause nothin's ever gonna be alright nohow
No matter how I struggle and strive
I'll never get out of this world alive
I could buy a Sunday suit and it would leave me broke
If it had two pair of pants I would burn the coat
No matter how I struggle and strive
I'll never get out of this world alive
If it was rainin' gold I wouldn't stand a chance
I wouldn't have a pocket in my patched up pants
No matter how I struggle and strive
I'll never get out of this world alive
The news is out - all over town
That you've been seen - a-runnin' 'round
I know that I - should leave, but then
I just can't go - you win again.
This heart of mine - could never see
What ev'rybod - y knew but me
Just trusting you - was my great sin
What can I do - you win again.
I'm sorry for - your victim now
'Cause soon his head - like mine will bow
He'll give his heart - but all in vain
And someday say - you win again.
You have no heart - you have no shame
You take true love - and give the blame
I guess that I - should not complain
I love you still - you win again.
Well, you're just in time to be too late
I tried to but I couldn't wait
And now I've got another date
So I won't be home no more
You're just in time to miss the boat
So don't take off your hat and coat
Be on your way, that's all she wrote
'Cause I won't be home no more.
I stood around a month or two
And waited for your call
Now I'm too busy pitchin' woo
So come around next fall
I scratched your name right off my slate
And hung a sign on my front gate
You're just in time to be too late
And I won't be home no more.
Well, you're just in time to turn around
And drive your buggy back to town
You looked me up I turned you down
And I won't be home no more
You're just in time to change your tune
Go tell your troubles to the moon
And call around next May or June
'Cause I won't be home no more.
I used to be the patient kind
Believed each alibi
But that's all done, I've changed my mind
I've got new fish to fry
Well, you're just in time to celebrate 
The things you didn't calculate
You're just in time to be too late
And I won't be home no more.
A tongue can accuse and carry bad news
The seeds of distrust, it will sow
But unless you've made no mistakes in your life
Be careful of stones that you throw.
A neighbor was passing my garden one time
She stopped and I knew right away 
That it was gossip, not flowers, she had on her mind 
And this is what I heard my neighbor say:
"That girl down the street should be run from our midst
She drinks and she talks quite a lot 
She knows not to speak to my child or to me."
My neighbor then smiled and I thought:
A car speeded by and the screamin' of brakes
A sound that made my blood chill
For my neighbor's one child had been pulled from the path
And saved by a girl lying still.
The child was unhurt and my neighbor cried out:
"Oh! who was that brave girl so sweet?" 
I covered the crushed, broken body and said:
"The bad girl who lived down the street."
When I agree with you baby it makes you mad and when I don't it makes you sad
When I argue back you pack and leave and when I don't you pout in grieve
There just ain't nobody knows what I go through
Will you please make up your mind what you want me to do
You say get out and I'd better stay gone
Then you have a big policeman drag me back home
You holler good and loud put him in the calaboose
Then you cry and ask the judge won't you please turn him loose
The good Lord only knows what I go through
Will you please make up your mind what you want me to do
My life with you baby has been one hard knock
Lord my head looks like an old chop block
And I'll tell you right now honey that ain't all
You done kicked me till I feel like a used football
There just ain't nobody knows what I go through
Will you please make up your mind what you want me to do
You knock me down and then you pick me up
Honey do you have to love so doggone rough
I wish to my soul you'd slow down the pace
Cause I tell you right now the hide's gettin' sca'ce
There just ain't nobody knows what I go through
Will you please make up your mind what you want me to do
Why when I married you, you were such a meek little thing
But honey among tigers you'd be queen
If a poor little rabbit had you on his side
Every hound in the country would crawl off and hide
There just ain't nobody knows what I go through
Will you please make up your mind 
What in the confounded cat hair you want me to do
Everybody says you let me down
That I should be ashamed to take you 'round
Makes no difference what you used to do;
Darling, I could never be ashamed of you.
Maybe you were reckless yesterday
but together, we can find a brighter way.
In my heart, I know that you'll come through
Darling, I could never be ashamed of you
All the happiness I've ever known
came the day you said you'd be my own
and it matters not what we go through
Darlin I could never be ashamed of you
Maybe you've been cheated in the past,
and perhaps those memories will always last
even though you proved to be untrue
darlin I could never be ashamed of you.
Your cheatin' heart
Will make you weep
You'll cry and cry
And try to sleep
But sleep won't come
The whole night through
Your cheatin' heart will tell on you...
When tears come down
Like falling rain
You'll toss around
And call my name
You'll walk the floor
The way I do
Your cheatin' heart will tell on you...
Your cheatin' heart
Will pine some day
And crave the love
You threw away
The time will come
When you'll be blue
Your cheatin' heart will tell on you...
When tears come down
Like falling rain
You'll toss around
And call my name
You'll walk the floor
The way I do
Your cheatin' heart will tell on you...
KAW-LIGA, was a wooden Indian standing by the door
He fell in love with an Indian maid over in the antique store
KAW-LIGA - A, just stood there and never let it show
So she could never answer "YES" or "NO".
He always wore his Sunday feathers and held a tomahawk
The maiden wore her beads and braids and hoped someday he'd talk
KAW-LIGA - A, too stubborn to ever show a sign
Because his heart was made of knotty pine.
Poor ol' KAW-LIGA, he never got a kiss
Poor ol' KAW-LIGA, he don't know what he missed
Is it any wonder that his face is red
KAW-LIGA, that poor ol' wooden head.
KAW-LIGA, was a lonely Indian never went nowhere
His heart was set on the Indian maiden with the coal black hair
KAW-LIGA - A, just stood there and never let it show
So she could never answer "YES" or "NO".
Then one day a wealthy customer bought the Indian maid
And took her, oh, so far away, but ol' KAW-LIGA stayed
KAW-LIGA - A, just stands there as lonely as can be
And wishes he was still an old pine tree.
Take these chains from my heart and set me free
You've grown cold and no longer care for me
All my faith in you is gone but the heartaches linger on
Take these chains from my heart and set me free
Take these tears from my eyes and let me see
Just a spark of the love that used to be
If you love somebody new let me find a new love too
Take these chains from my heart and set me free
Give my heart just a word of sympathy
Be as fair to my heart as you can be
Then if you no longer care
For the love that's beating there
Take these chains from my heart and set me free
Take these chains from my heart and set me free
You've grown cold and no longer care for me
All my faith in you is gone but the heartaches linger on
Take these chains from my heart and set me free
Hi, neighbors, this is our new album
And we've chosen songs from the great Bob Wills
Who is a legend
As far as we in the business are concerned
And I know, people across the United States
You know, we finally call him the "Old Man"
Because to us, that's just what he is
You'll always know him by the lonesome fiddle
The white hat, the high-heeled boots
The cigar smoke, and some of these wonderful songs
We hope you like our version of 'em
As we pay tribute to one of the greatest of all time Bob Wills 
Deep within my heart lies a melody
A song of old San Antone
Where in dreams I live with a memory
Beneath the stars all alone
It was there I found beside the Alamo
Enchantment strange as the blue up above
A moonlit path that only she would know
Still hears my broken song of love
Moon in all your splendor knows only my heart
Call back my Rose, Rose of San Antone
Lips so sweet and tender like petals fallin' apart
Speak once again of my love, my own
Broken song, empty words I know
Still live in my heart all alone
And that moonlit pass BY the Alamo
And Rose, my Rose of San Antone
I was born in dixie in a boomer's shack,
Just a little old shanty by a railroad track,
The hummin' of the drivers was my lullaby,
And a freight train whistle taught me how to cry.
I've got the freight train blues, lordy, lordy, lordy,
Got 'em in the bottom of my ramblin' shoes,
And when that whistle blows, I've gotta go,
oh! lordy! guess I'm never gonna lose,
The mean old freight train blues.
Now my pappy was a fireman and my mammy dear,
Was the only daughter of an en-gin-eer,
My sister married a brakeman and it ain't no joke,
Now it's a shame the way she keeps a good man broke.
I've got the freight train blues, lordy, lordy, lordy,
Got 'em in the bottom of my ramblin' shoes,
And when the whistle blows, I've gotta go,
oh! lordy! guess I'm never gonna lose,
The mean old freight train blues.
No need for you to set alone,
just waiting by your telephone
Cause I ain't gonna call you any more.
Oh I gave you love and you broke my heart,
And you cheated on me from the start.
And now I ain't gonna love you anymore.
I mean I ain't gonna love you anymore,
I know I couldn't love you as before.
So I'm gonna tell you goodbye,
Don't mind these tears there in my eyes
Cause I ain't gonna love you anymore
My darlin' I just worship you,
and look what you have loved me thru.
You left me with a heart so sick and sore.
Oh you're the one that was unfair,
It wasn't in you to play square.
And now I ain't gonna love you anymore.
Though our paths in life have parted 
You no longer care for me but when you're happy with another 
Won't you sometimes think of me
When the evenin' sun is sinking 
down behind the trees and the moon is slowly rising 
Won't you sometimes think of me
I'll always keep your picture it means so much to me
And every night I'll pray dear that 
You'll sometimes think of me
Think of days that are gone dear 
days we could recall if you would only try dear 
But still you blame me for all
When the evenin' sun is sinking 
down behind the trees and the moon is slowly rising 
Won't you sometimes think of me
All I can say's I tried dear 
But you wouldn't let it be
So if you're ever sad and lonely
Won't you sometimes think of me
When the evenin' sun is sinking 
down behind the trees and the moon is slowly rising 
Won't you sometimes think of me
Why should I cry, I never done you wrong
I kept my vows you left me all alone
You told me you loved me, you told me a lie
Why should I pay, tell me why should I cry
You knew I worshipped you, right from the start
I gave you my love, never thought that we'd part
You didn't care enough, to even say goodbye
Why should I pay, tell me why should I cry
You know I miss you, now that you're gone
Life can be sad when you're livin' all alone
But darlin' I'll forget you, your memory will die
Why should I pay, tell me why should I cry
I built a dream world darlin' for two
Built it on hope and the love I thought was true
But I've seen my blue skies all turn to gray
I watched my dream world crumble like clay
We were so happy, darlin' we two
But then you changed dear, you found someone new
I saw all the joys of life fade far away
I watched my dream world crumble like clay
You promised darlin' that we'd never part
But now you've gone dear, breakin' my heart
I saw saw your love dear, fade and die away
I watched my dream world crumble like clay
I told my heart I didn't love you
That I'd be happy if we'd part
But now I know I was mistaken
I Told A Lie To My Heart.
I told my heart I didn't love you
Now we'll forever be apart
Lonely years of tears and sorrow
I Told A Lie To My Heart.
If we sin somehow we pay
And now the bitter teardrops start
I must learn to live without you
I Told A Lie To My Heart.
I told my heart I didn't love you
That I'd be happy if we'd part
Lonely years of tears and sorrow
I Told A Lie To My Heart.
In a little pine grove by the old home
There's someone who's restin' alone 
And there on the the tomb, these words I read
The words were Mother is gone. 
Mother is gone, to her home
Way up in heaven above
And my heart's so sad, for the words I read there
The words said Mother is gone.
As I stood alone, with mem'ries of home
The place I left long, long ago
I returned home, but I waited too long
For the words said, Mother is gone.
My friends did say, before she went away
She called my name o'er and o'er
So trustin' in God's love, I'll meet her above
Over there on that other shore.
Now at last you've gone and left me
Like a piece of driftwood on the sea
You said that you no longer loved me
But in my dreams you still belong to me
In my dreams you're still my only darlin'
Just like you used to be
And tho I've lost you to another
In my dreams you still belong to me
At night when I am sad and lonely
It's then I really know you're gone
But I just go to sleep praying
That you'll be back before so long
No matter where you wander, darlin'
If it be across the deep blue sea
Everyday you'll know I'll miss you
And in my dreams you'll still belong to me
In my dreams you're still my only darlin'
Just like you used to be
And tho I lost you to another
In my dreams you still belong to me
Oh don't you know that Jesus died to wash your sins away
Please heed His call and in sin don't fall
We're getting closer to the grave each day
They nailed his hands there on the cross
On His head the thorns did lay
Be prepared to go, there's one thing I know
We're getting closer to the grave each day
Sinner man won't you stop now and pray
Leave the road of sin alone
Let Jesus lead you home
We're getting closer to the grave each day
When my work here is o'er
And trials come no more
On that great day I'm going home
To live forever more, just o'er on heaven's shore
When my life here is o'er I'm going home
I'm going home, I'm going home
When my life here is o'er I'm going home
Won't it be so sweet, to rest at Jesus' feet
When my life here is o'er I'm going home
I'm traveling in the light
And my way is clear and bright
Some glad day I'm going home
Heading for the pearly gates for there my savior waits
When my life here is o'er I'm going home
As I travel down life's road
So heavy is my load
But some glad day I'm going home
I'll meet my loved ones there, in that land so bright and fair
When my life here is o'er I'm going home
All my life I've been so lonesome 
If happpiness came, I missed the call
All my dreams have died and vanished
And now I'm So Tired Of It All.
In life and love, I've been a failure
Too many tears thru it all
Too many broken vows and promises
And now I'm So Tired Of It All.
Ev'ry thing I loved, I lost, dear
Too many times I've watched my castles fall
My life is full of regretting
And now I'm So Tired Of It All.
From this world I'll soon be goin'
No one will miss me, after all
Up there, I pray I'll find contentment
But now I'm So Tired Of It All
When you're alone and blue tonight my little darlin'
And you're pillows stained with tears from your blue eyes
I'm so sorry dear to say we're not together
But you know you caused it all by telling lies
Now I know I'll never find another sweetheart
When you left I hung my head down and I cried
But we quarled and now we're through my little darlin'
And you know you caused it all by telling lies
We were happy, oh so happy little darlin'
And our little home was like a paradise
But today you're all alone and broken hearted
And you know you cause it all by telling lies
Now I know I'll never find another sweetheart
When you left I hung my head down and I cried
But we quarled and now we're through my little darlin'
And you know you caused it all by telling lies
Faded love and winter roses always bloom in memory
Faded love and winter roses yearning hearts that used to be
Will they meet again tomorrow where we parted yesterday
Give me back the winter roses and the love you took away
Faded love and winter roses sprinkled with a lonely tear
Faded love and winter roses still recall each yesteryear
Will I always be a dreamer dreaming of the used to be
Faded love and winter roses live and die in memory
Oh! Plea-ease - don't let me love you
Just because I'm feelin' blue
And Plea-ease - don't let me kiss you
'Cause I know you'll be untrue.
Because you're sweet dear, I want to love you
Plea-ease - stay away from my heart
And Plea-ease - don't let me love you
'Cause I know you'll break my heart.
Oh! Plea-ease - don't call me darlin'
When I know you don't love me
And Plea-ease - don't whisper sweetheart
For I know it just can't be
When I'm lonely, I want you only
Where is the dream I once knew
Oh! Plea-ease - don't let me love you
'Cause I know you'll be untrue.
There's no room in my heart for the blues
Love is satisfied to either win or lose
Darlin', if our pathways part, let there be no broken hearts
There's no room in my heart for the blues
There's no room in my life for a sigh
We'll be strong enough to face our last goodbye
Darlin', if our romance ends, let us part the best of friends
There's no room in my heart for the blues
There's no room in my memory for tears
We'll let bygones be forgotten souvenirs
If your hungry heart forgets, let there be no sad regrets
There's no room in my heart for the blues
There's no room in my life for a sigh
We'll be strong enough to face our last goodbye
Darlin' if our romance ends let us be the best of friends
There's no room in my heart for the blues
They tell me little darlin',
That tomorrow you'll be wed,
You thought that you would hurt me,
But you hurt yourself instead,
I'll always be the same old pal,
Just as in years gone by,
I'll just set back and watch you,
While you set alone and cry.
Tears fallin' down your pretty cheeks,
Tears you cannot hide and tears you cannot keep,
They are tears of sorrow and tears of delight,
I wish I had a nickel, for every tear you shed last night.
I just dropped by to tell you that I wish you happi-ness,
I hope that you'll forgive me for in-truding like this,
I hope my dear your happiness will follow through the years,
I'll just set back and watch you, while you shed those bitter tears.
You were there in my arms alone in the moonlight
The trees played the waltz of the wind
It was there I knew I'd love you forever
As we danced to the waltz of the wind
The stars up above you look down in your eyes 
And there in the moonlight I knew
So I'll say goodbye dear till tomorrow
Till we dance to the waltz of the wind
I talked with a stranger, so sad and alone.
His Garments were sackled, all tattered and torn
He told me a story,of sorrow and woe
His heart went to heaven,at the first fall of snow
He spoke of his angel, a dear baby girl
He loved every footstep, he loved every curl
But she went to heaven, just one year ago
The angels came for her, at the first fall of snow
He still had the dolly, that she used to love
He held and caressed it, and gazed up above
He whispered my baby, your waiting I know
I'll bring you your dolly, at the first fall of snow
And there as I listened, my eyes filled with tears
I knew she was part of, his happier years
His frail body trembled, he spoke soft and low
I'll be with my baby, at the first fall of snow
I patted his shoulder, my feelings to hide
He couldn't know, I was crying inside
He smiled as we parted, cause he didn't know
That we lost our baby, at the first fall of snow
Better pack up your suitcase and leave in a hurry 
Now I don't wanna show you the door
Since the day that we met you've been nothin' but trouble
Now I don't want you here anymore
Run along run along don't pester me further
For I know that you'll never be true
If you can't treat me right then get out of my life
Go and leave me alone with the blues
Oh you stayed by my side till you got all my money
Now my clothes are all ragged and torn
Since the day that we met you've been nothin' but worry
Lord I wish I had never been born
Run along run along don't you pester me further
I know that you'll never be true
If you can't treat me right then get out of my life
Go and leave me alone with these blues
You may ramble and ramble this whole wide world over 
But don't trust any woman you meet
They won't leave you alone till they've got your last dollar
Then you're just like the dirt beneath their feet
Run along run along don't you pester me further
For I know that you'll never be true
If you can't treat me right then get out of my life
Go and leave me alone with these blues
I'm Free At Last from love and all its' worries
I'm Free because you wanted it that way
Now you can go but there's no need to hurry
'Cause ne'er again will I ask you to stay.
So run along, I know that you don't want me
So many times you've proved that in the past
After you're gone, when mem'ries come to haunt me
I'll hide my tears and say I'm Free At Last.
I'm Free At Last don't ask me why I'm cryin'
Strange as it seems, somehow I love you yet
Don't say you care, you know that you'll be lying
Don't hurt me more, show my heart some respect. 
I've got a blue love in my heart
What can I do, love, with my heart
It's got a burnin', yearnin' while we're apart
I've got a blue love in my heart.
So blue the nights, so blue the days
Why don't you write to me and say;
You've got a true love in your heart
And stop this burnin', yearnin' while we're apart
I've got a blue love in my heart.
I've got an old flame in my heart
A solid-gold flame in my heart
I'm like a weepin'-willow, while we're apart
I've got a blue love in my heart.
What can i do, where can i go
I never knew i loved you so;
I've got a blue love in my heart
What can i do love with my heart
I'm like a weepin-willow, while we're apart
I got a blue love in my heart.
For years I've lived without a meaning
I've lost faith in dreams somehow
I'm so sick and tired of scheming
I guess it just don't matter now
All my life I've been a loser
It seems that fate has made a vow
That I will never know contentment
But it just don't matter now
Yes I knew the day I lost you
But could not face fact, somehow
And I knew just what it cost you
But it just don't matter now
All my heart has lost a feeling
That meant more to me than thou
And I will never say I blame you
Cause it just don't matter now
Out on the corner standin' so bold
Stood a little paper boy so hungry and cold
And as the crowd came passin' by
These words he said with tears in his eyes
"Please buy a paper from me
So I can get me somethin' to eat
My clothes are ragged, no shoes on my feet"
Said the little paper boy, there on the street
"Out in this cold wide world all alone
I have no place on this earth to call home
I haven't had the chance that other kids had
I have no mother, nor even a dad"
"So please buy a paper from me
So I can get me somethin' to eat
My clothes are ragged, no shoes on my feet"
Said the little paper boy, there on the street
Early next mornin' as the crowd passed by
The little boy was gone and they wondered why
They started searchin' and then found him dead
He died with the papers under his head
No one was there, his body to claim
There he was lying but he felt no pain
Now he has gone up to Heaven we know
The little paper boy who died in the snow
There ya have it, friends
Someday you'll call my name and I won't answer
Someday you'll reach for me I won't be there
For you've grown tired of all the love I gave you
But someday you'll wish that I still care.
All these years how I've loved you
Still I know I claim you for my own
Someday you'll call my name and I won't answer
For someday you'll find yourself alone.
When you hair has turned from Gold to Silver
And your eyes are dimmed by passing years
You'll remember darling what I told you
There'll be no one then to dry your tears.
There'll come a time in your life dear
When you'll need someone who will care
Someday you'll call my name and I won't answer
For someday you'll find that I'm not there.
There's a mighty battle coming and it's well now on its way.
It'll be fought at Armageddon, it shall be a sad, sad day.
In the Book of Revelation, words in chapter sixteen say
There'll be gathered there great armies for that battle on that day.
All the way from the gates of Eden to the Battle of Armageddon
There's been troubles and tribulation, there'll be sorrow and despair.
He has said "Be ye not troubled for these things shall come to pass."
Then your life will be eternal when you dwell with Him atlast.
Turn the pages of your Bible, in St. Matthew you will see,
Start with chapter twenty-four and read from one to thirty-three.
In our Savior's blessed words He said on earth, He prophesised,
For He spoke of this great battle that is coming by and by.
There'll be nation against nation, there'll be war and rumor of war.
There'll be great signs in Heaven, in the sun, the moon, the stars.
Oh, the hearts of men shall fail them, there'll be gnashing of the teeth.
Those who seek it will recieve it, mercy at the Savior's feet.
No one will ever know my heart is breaking
Although a million teardrops start to flow
I'll cry myself to sleep and wake up smiling
I'll miss you but no one will ever know
I'll tell them we grew tired of each other
And realized our dreams could never be
I'll even make believe I never loved you
Then no one will ever know the truth but me
No one will ever know how much I'm pineing
Each time the past comes back to haunt me so
No one will ever see the tears I'm hiding
You've hurt me but no one will ever know
I'll tell then I found true love with another
That I was glad the day you set me free
I'll even make believe I never loved you 
Then no one will ever know the truth but me
With tears in my eyes, dear, I begged you to stay
You couldn't forgive me, so you went away
I made a mistake, dear, by tellin' you lies
Now I lay awake, dear, with tears in my eyes
No more to be sweetheart, no more to be friend
Please give me a chance, dear, and I'll make amends
My yesterdays haunt me, my weary heart cries
I just can't go on, dear, with tears in my eyes
If you ever need me, oh please let me know
Wherever you lead me, I'm willin' to go
The past is a flower, that withers and dies
I'll wake up tomorrow, with tears in my eyes
With tears in my eyes, dear, I begged you to stay
You couldn't forgive me, so you went away
I made a mistake, dear, by tellin' you lies
Now I lay awake, dear, with tears in my eyes
There's a road that's straight and narrow
That the saints have travelled on
Paved with all the tribulations
Of the martyrs that have gone
If you're grateful for their vict'ries
And for showin' us the way
Then give thanks for all your blessin's
Get on your knees and pray.
Thank God for ev'ry flower and each tree
Thank God for all the mountains and the seas
Thank God for givin' life to you and me
Wherever you may be, Thank God.
In this world of grief and sorrow
Filled with selfishness and greed
There remains the Glory Fountain
To supply our every need
You can find it in the temple
With a welcome on the door
But be sure to count your blessin's
Before you ask for more.
Be forgivin to the wayward
Like the Master told us to
When He said forgive them Father
For they know not what they do
They would change their way of livin'
If they could but understand
So remember they're your brothers
They need a helpin' hand.
Far away from friends and loved ones
'mid the storm, a soldier lay
Gathered 'round him all his buddies
Raised his head, we heard him say.
There's a lamp light in the window
Where an angel from above
Gently rocked my baby cradle
With such tender care and love.
Mother dearest, darlin' mother
It would ease this awful pain
If she'd sing until I'm sleepin'
Rock my cradle once again.
'neath the palms tonight he's sleepin'
On an island far away
Tho' the years pass on in sorrow
I still recall his words today.
Now I got rockin' chair money
But I got it the hard, hard way
I fought in every battle
From the start to the VJ day
And now I'll rock...yeah rock...
Oh baby rock...rock on down the line
Now some folks seem to be jealous
Some don't seem to care
But I got rockin' chair money, honey
To rock on away from here
Cause I love to rock...yeah rock...
Baby, rock, rock on down the line
I rocked away out on the ocean
I rocked from here and there
My baby stepped out while I was gone
Now she don't get my rockin' chair
Cause I love to rock, yeah rock
Baby, rock, rock on down the line
I'll soon get my big check, baby
And then we'll have some fun
This rockin' chair money, honey
Is better than totin' a gun
Cause I love to rock, yeah rock
Baby, rock, let's rock on down the line
Now, honey, let's go honky tonkin'
Let's honky tonk all night
Let's lollygag and smooch and love
and do it all up right
Cause I love to rock, yeah rock
Baby, rock, let's rock on down the line
All day I've faced the barren waste 
With out the taste of water... cool, water.
Ole Dan and I, with throats burned dry,
and souls that cry 
for water... cool, clear water.
The nights are cool and I'm a fool.
Each star's a pool of water... cool, clear water.
And with the dawn I'll wake and yawn 
and carry on 
to water... cool, clear water.
The shadows sway and seem to say
Tonight we pray for water.... cool, clear water
And way up there He'll hear our prayer
and show us where 
there's water... cool, clear water.
Keep a-movin' Dan. Don't you listen to him Dan.
He's the devil, not a man. 
He spreads the burnin' sand with water.
Say Dan can't you see that big green tree,
where the water's runnin' free. 
It's waiting there for you and me 
and water.... cool, clear water.
Dan's feet are sore he's yearnin' for
Just one thing more than water.... cool, clear water.
Like me I guess he'd like to rest
where there's no quest 
for water... cool, clear water.
Her eyes were blue, her hair was auburn
Her smile was like an angel fair
She was her daddy's only daughter
On the Tennessee Border
One night I took a ride just across the line
I picked her up in a pickup truck
And she broke this heart of mine
Her mama said: "No-o, she's my only daughter,"
But we got married on the Tennessee Border.
The roses were bloomin' there on the Border
The moon was shinin' there
Her personality made me want her
On the Tennessee Border.
Now I've been married about six months,
Only six months you see,
The first three months, was all OK,
But the last three is killin' me,
My wife began her hissin', cut down on her kissin',
And then she failed to shine my shoes,
My shirts they came up wrinkled,
My pants with dirt were sprinkled,
And then I took the first year blues.
Well then she started naggin',
She left the sink a'saggin',
With dishes piled up high,
No food upon the table, she said if she was able,
She'd cook something bye and bye,
Then I began to wonder, if I had made a blunder,
When I said I do, she must have read my thinkin',
Her eyes began to blinkin' and that gal broke in - to.
Well I heard the dishes crashin',
and I began to dashin', Gettin' out of sight,
for right there was my honey,
On who I'd spent my money, turnin' into dy - na - mite,
Then after she'd exploded, her meanness all unloaded,
And things began to simmer down,
I found myself a'bleedin', and very much a'needin',
Of stitches taken all a - round.
Well then she started cryin', I felt myself a'sighin',
And then I took her in my arms,
I was afraid to scold her, so I just gently told her,
She didn't do a bit of harm,
Now the first six months is over, and I am much the older,
And experienced with a wife,
If I can stand the next six, my friends all say I'll be fixed,
To take it the rest of my life.
Sitting alone in my prison cell
Watching the setting sun
My trial on earth is over now
I'm sentenced to die at dawn
But after I die in the electric chair
The judge will give me the 'lectric chair
But that won't worry me
When I face the judge of eternity
Oh mother I'm leavin' you here alone
I've disgraced your name I know
This trial on earth was for my soul
When the road is rocky and you're carrying the load wait for the light to shine
If you find you're friendless on that weary lonesome road wait for the light to shine
Wait for the light to shine wait for the light to shine
Pull yourself together and keep looking for the sign wait for the light to shine
Don't forget your brother as you travel through this land wait for the light to shine
He may be in trouble and may need a helping hand wait for the light to shine
Wait for the light to shine wait for the light to shine
Never give up hope or cast your pearls and pour this wine wait for the light to shine
Don't let trouble fool you and your sin will all be gone wait for the light to shine
Don't forget his darkness just before the break of dawn wait for the light to shine
Wait for the light to shine wait for the light to shine
Keep these wordson your mind as you walk out narrow line wait for the light to shine
We live in two different worlds, dear
That's why we're so far apart
You made your world out of vows that are broken
I built a world in my heart
Everyone here tried to warn me
You were just playing a game
I told them all we were meant for each other
I thought our worlds were the same
If you stay over in your world
Oh, how my poor heart will pine
Darling, someday when your memories wander
Won't you come over in mine
We live in two different worlds, dear
My world is honest and true
Sweetheart, remember when your world gets lonesome
I'll still be waiting for you
Hey Roly Poly eatin' corn and taters hungry every minute of the day
Roly Poly knowin' all the biscuits long as he can chew it it's okay
He can eat an apple pie and never even bat an eye
He likes everything from a soup to hay
Roly Poly daddy's little fatty and he's gonna be a man someday
Roly Poly scrambled eggs for breakfast bread and jelly twenty times a day
Roly Poly eats a hard day dinner it takes lots of strenght to run and play
Bowls up weeds and does the chores run both ways to Holday's stores
He wears up that apetite that way
Roly Poly daddy's little fatty but he's gonna be a man someday
Swing wide your gate of love, open wide up your heart
I knew when I first met you that you'd be my sweetheart
Swing wide your gate of love and please don't let me fall
I know you're gonna love me after all
Swing wide the gate and leave it open
Towards the center of your heart I'll be bound
And I'll mend the heart that has been broken
I'm not the kind of guy to let you down
So, swing wide your gate of love, open it for me
For you are the one I want, my darlin', can't you see
Make up your mind to like me and to be my turtledove
I love you, so swing wide your gate of love
I'm a'headin' back to dixie,
That's the place i long to be,
Where the cotton grows and the suwanee flows,
That's home sweet home to me,
Where they meet you and they greet you,
With the sweetest how you are,
Well shut my mouth, i'm a'headin' south,
On the dixie cannon- ball
On the dixie cannonball, on the dixie cannonball,
Just listen to the whistle, it'll thrill you one and all,
And i know there's some one waitin', with the sweetest how you are,
Well shut my mouth, i'm a'headin' south, on the dixie cannon-ball
When i cross them smokey mountains. i'll be countin' every mile,
When the whistle blows, i'll be on my toes,
And i'll shuffle down the aisle,
And i know i'll not be lonesome,
When i see them treetops tall,
On the dixie cannon-ball
On the dixie cannonball, on the dixie cannonball,
Just listen to the whistle, it'll thrill you one and all,
And i know there's some one waitin', with the sweetest how you are,
Well shut my mouth, i'm a'headin' south, on the dixie cannon-ball
Yes, i'm goin' back to dixie, that's the place i long to be,
Where the cotton grows and the suwanee flows,
That's home sweet home to me,
Where they meet you and they greet you,
With the sweetest how you are,
Well shut my mouth, i'm a'headin' south,
On the dixie cannon- ball
On the dixie cannonball, on the dixie cannonball,
Just listen to the whistle, it'll thrill you one and all,
And i know there's some one waitin', with the sweetest how you are,
Well shut my mouth, i'm a'headin' south, on the dixie cannon-ball
Sundown and sorrow have found me
Memories are makin' me blue
Here with the shadows around me
I can't forget lovin' you
Nothing but daydreams to haunt me
Dreams that will never come true
It's hard to know you don't want me
I just can't help lovin' you
Forever, so long I've been yearnin'
Wondering what I could do
Deep in my heart, there's a burnin'
I just can't help lovin' you
The Devil's Train is long and black
It rides on rails of fear
It's headin' for destruction now
With a drunken engineer
Oh see the greatness of the crowd
That waits beside the track
They're leavin' on that Devil's Train
And never comin' back
Oh Lord, please stop that terrible train
Before it is too late
And teach them how to bow their heads
Before it steals their fate
The Devil's Train will take you
To a land of groans and pain
You'll spend your days in sorrow
If you ride that Devil's Train
Oh listen to that whistle scream
Like echoes from the blue
The blood is white and spouting steam
She's on her way to doom
Oh Lord, please stop that terrible train
Before it is too late
And teach them how to bow their heads
Before it steals their fate
The Devil's Train is long and black
It's beautiful to see
It offers you temptation
But it gives you misery
So come and ride that glorious train
Where happiness is free
It's on its way to heaven now
To spend eternity
Oh Lord, please stop that terrible train
Before it is too late
And teach them how to bow their heads
Before it steals their fate
We met in the springtime when blossoms unfold
The pastures were green and the meadows were gold
Our love was in flower as summer grew on
Her love like the leaves now has withered and gone.
The roses have faded, there's frost at my door
The birds in the morning don't sing anymore
The grass in the valley is starting to die
And out in the darkness the whippoorwills cry.
Alone and forsaken by fate and by man
Oh, lord, if you hear me please hold to my hand
Oh, please understand.
Oh, where has she gone to, oh, where can she be
She may have forsaken some other like me
She promised to honor, to love and obey
Each vow was a plaything that she threw away.
The darkness is falling, the sky has turned gray
A hound in the distance is starting to "bay"
I wonder, I wonder - what she's thinking of
Forsaken, forgotten - without any love.
Alone and forsaken by fate and by man
Some people struggle for riches
And all of the things they will buy
But all of my hopes for treasures
Are away beyond the skies
Heaven holds all my treasures
More precious than diamonds and gold
Up there I'll meet my darlin'
Whom God has called back to the fold
In this world, I'm just a drifter
I know nothing but sorrow
But to me somehow it don't matter
For I know she's waiting up there
Heaven holds all my treasures
More precious than diamonds and gold
Up there I'll meet my darlin'
Whom God has called back to the fold
I stand on the banks of the river
And I stare at the water so deep
And think of my darlin'
Then I bow my head and weep
Heaven holds all my treasures
More precious than diamonds and gold
Up there I'll meet my darlin'
Whom God has called back to the fold
Lost on the river
Dark is the night
Just like the blind
Praying for sight
Drifting alone 
Heart filled with strife
I'm lost on the river
The river of life
Once dear I thought
I knew the way
But that was before
Old sad yesterday
Words that you told me
Cut like a knife
I'm lost on the river
The river of life
Out on this river
Where sorrow creeps
Thiinking of you
And how my heart weeps
Tomorrow you'll be
Another man's wife
And I'm lost on the river
The river of life
People steal, they cheat and lie
For wealth and what it will buy
Don't they know on the judgement day
That their gold and silver will melt away
I'd rather be in a deep, dark grave
And know that my poor soul was saved
Than to live in this world in a house of gold
And deny my God and doon my soul
Jesus said ,come on to me
I'll break sin's chains and set you free
Ill carry you to a home on high 
Where youll never, never die
What good is gold and silver, too
When your heart's not good and true
Sinner hear me when I say
Fall down on your knees and pray
Jesus died there on the cross
So this world would not be lost
Sinner hear now what I say
For someday you ll have to pay
What good is gold and silver too
If your heart's not good and true
Sinner, hear me when I say
Fall down on your knees and pray
There's a singin' waterfall
In the mountains far away
That's where I long to be
At the close of Ev'ry day
That's where my sweetheart's sleepin'
Down beneath the clay
I often sit and wonder
Why the Lord took her away.
We'd meet there ev'ry Ev'nin'
When the Sun was sinkin' low
And we'd listen to the waters
As they rippled soft and low
And since she's gone to Heaven
I miss her most of all
Tonight my darlin's sleepin'
By the singin' waterfall.
Last night as I lay dreamin'
I heard my darlin' call
And then I went to meet her
By the singin' waterfall
She took me in her arms
Just like she used to do
And then I heard her whisper
We'll meet beyond the blue.
Dear Brother, Mama left us this morning
Death's angels took her away
She's gone to meet Daddy up there in heaven
But we'll meet again some day. 
She left this world with a smile on her face
Whisp'ring the Saviour's name
Dear Brother, Mama left us this morning
For the city where is no pain.
As I stood by her bedside, those last few moments
I lived my childhood again
I thought of you Brother and of the old homestead
And my tears they fell like rain.
Passing by a lonesome graveyard
Everything I love is gone
Weeping as they lay my darling
'Neath a cold gray tomb of stone
In this world I'm left to wander
With no one to call my own
While my precious darling's sleeping
'Neath a cold gray tomb of stone
Out there in that lonesome graveyard
She is sleeping all alone
And I buried my heart with her
Neath a cold gray tomb of stone
Skies above are dark and stormy
All the sunshine, all is gone
For the while my love is sleeping
'Neath a cold gray tomb of stone
My heart is dead and yet i'm living
Traveling through this world alone
I wish that I was with my darling
'Neath a cold gray tomb of stone
The was a time I thought you loved me
and that we two could get along
But now I know I was just dreaming
For time has proven I was wrong
I built a world for us together
But love to you was just a song
And now I know I was mistaken
For time has prove I was wrong
TOOK MY GAL TO THE PICTURE SHOW, JUST THE OTHER DAY,
BUT WHEN I TRIED TO HOLD HER HAND,
HERE'S WHAT SHE HAD TO SAY.
NO NOT NOW, (no not now), NO NOT NOW, (no not now),
NO NOT NOW, BUT MAYBE NEXT WEEK SOME - HOW.
WALKED MY GAL HOME TO THE DOOR, AND ASKED HER FOR A KISS,
BUT SHE QUICKLY TURNED AWAY, AND THEN SHE TOLD ME THIS.
I ASKED MY GAL TO MARRY ME, RECKON WHAT SHE SAID,
SHE SAID I WOULDN'T MARRY YOU, IF ALL THE REST WERE DEAD.
BUT SHE WENT AND CHANGED HER MIND, HOW I REGRET THAT DAY,
'CAUSE EVERY SINCE I MARRIED HER, HERE'S ALL THAT SHE CAN SAY.
I STAYED OUT TOO LATE LAST NIGHT, ON A LITTLE SPREE,
AND WHEN I ASKED HER TO LET ME IN, HERE'S ALL SHE SAID TO ME.
When you're tired of breaking other hearts
Won't you come back again and break mine
When you're home and darlin'
And the love light no longer shines
When your dream world falls around you
And you sit by yourself and pine
When you're tired of breaking other hearts
Won't you come back again and break mine
HONEY DO YOU LOVE ME, HUH, HONEY DO YOU LOVE ME, HUH,
DO YOU WANT TO MARRY, GOT NO TIME TO TARRY,
HONEY DO YOU LOVE ME, HUH, QUIT YOUR HESITATIN',
I'M TIRED OF WAITIN', HONEY DO YOU LOVE ME, HUH.
HONEY WON'T YOU HOLD ME TIGHT, HONEY WON'T YOU HOLD ME TIGHT,
THAT OLE MOON ABOVE, WAS JUST MADE FOR LOVE,
HONEY WON'T YOU HOLD ME TIGHT, START YOUR TURTLE DOVEIN'
I NEED A LITTLE LOVIN', HONEY WON'T YOU HOLD ME TIGHT.
From the Great Salt Lakes of Utah to California's golden shore
Colorado and Nevada through the deserts burnin' door
While she's circlin' through the canyons, can't you see that mountain stream
It's the California Zephyr, the Union Pacific Queen
See her rockin' see her rollin' as she rambles on her way
She left LA this mornin' burnin' up the right of way
In the distance hear her moanin' hear her lonesome whistle scream
It's the California Zephyr, the Union Pacific Queen
She leaves the city of the angels headin' for ole Santa Fe
She's a makin' nauts she's makin' time just watch her swing and sway
And from way out in the darkness, see that headlight gleam
It's the California Zephyr, the Union Pacific Queen
From the Great Salt Lakes of Utah to California's golden shore
Colorado and Nevada through the deserts burnin' door
While she's circlin' through the canyons, can't you see that mountain stream
It's the California Zephyr, the Union Pacific Queen
Now if you go out and start a playing around 
Your baby's gonna tear your playhouse down
You better keep it on your mind (all the time)
You better keep it on your mind (all the time)
You'll be moanin' and a groanin',
Lord you better keep it on your mind
Now wrong is wrong and right is right
If you make a snake mad he's sure gonna bite
You better keep it on your mind (all the time)
You better keep it on your mind (all the time)
I've had it proven to me,
Lord you better keep it on your mind
Every fuss with a woman has got the same ole end
I don't believe the good Lord meant for a man to win
You better keep it on your mind (all the time)
You better keep it on your mind (all the time)
You'll be singing blue and lonesome,
Lord you better keep it on your mind
If you make your baby mad and she says goodbye 
There ain't a thing you can do but sit at home and cry 
You better keep it on your mind (all the time)
You better keep it on your mind (all the time)
You better call her sweet mama,
Lord you better keep it on your mind
If the judge says pay her forty dollars a week
You'll dig up the money or you'll work the streets
You better keep it on your mind (all the time)
You better keep it on your mind (all the time)
When you're wearing striped britches,
son it's gonna stay on your mind
So kiss her every mornin' and love her every night
Boy you can't win no matter if you're right
You better keep it on your mind (all the time)
You better keep it on your mind (all the time)
You better heed this warning,
Lord you better keep it on your mind
HOW CAN YOU REFUSE HIM NOW, HOW CAN YOU REFUSE HIM NOW,
HOW CAN YOU TURN AWAY FROM HIS SIDE,
WITH TEARS IN HIS EYES, ON THE CROSS THERE HE DIED,
HOW CAN YOU REFUSE JESUS NOW.
THERE'S A STORY OLD, THAT HAS OFTEN BEEN TOLD,
OF HOW OUR SAVIOR DIED, AS THEY NAILED HIS HANDS,
HE CRIED THEY DON'T UNDERSTAND,
AS THE BLOOD FLOWED FROM HIS SIDE.
AS HE HUNG THERE ON THE TREE, HE PRAYED FOR YOU AND ME,
THERE WAS NO ONE HIS PAIN TO EASE,
BEFORE HE DIED, HE FAINTLY CRIED,
FATHER FORGIVE THEM PLEASE.
LORD I WENT TO THE DOCTOR, HE TOOK ONE LOOK,
HE SAID THE TROUBLE WITH YOU AIN'T IN MY BOOK,
I'LL TELL YOU WHAT IT IS BUT IT AIN'T GOOD NEWS,
YOU'VE GOT AN AWFUL BAD CASE OF THEM LOW DOWN BLUES.
I'VE GOT THE MEAN OLD MISERIES IN MY SOUL,
I WENT TO THE RIVER, BUT THE WATER'S TOO COLD,
I'VE WALKED THE FLOOR 'TILL I'VE WORE OUT MY SHOES,
LORD THEY'RE KILLIN' ME, I MEAN THEM LOW DOWN BLUES.
LORD I NEVER KNEW A MAN COULD FEEL SO BAD,
I NEVER KNEW LIVIN' COULD BE SO SAD,
ALL I DO IS SET AND CRY,
LORD I'D HAVE TO GET BETTER, BEFORE I COULD DIE.
Countin' numbers 1-2-3
Never was much fun to me
But I'm learnin' how to count in rhyme
Ten little numbers and a boogie time
Crazy words don't mean a thing
Simple tunes are hard to sing
Just as easy as A-B-C
A haul right off and count with me
One-sy, two-sy, zig-sy and
haul up on a crack up on a wheelbarrow blackstone
dollar weighs ten, dollar weighs ten
Rome-ian num'rals they're a pain,
I is one and X is ten
What's the use to bother your head
To count like Caesar when Caesar's dead
Higgama, jiggama, horney cuff,
How many fingers do I hold up
One you say, and ten I see
Now open your eyes and count with me
One-sy, two-sy, zig-sy and
haul up on a crack up on a wheelbarrow blackstone
dollar weighs ten, dollar weighs ten
Travelin' down a lonely highway
I knew not where the road would end
Not a penny in my pocket
All alone without a friend
In a little country village
I met a man and he was blind
As I helped him cross the highway
Oh! Lord I cried his burdens are greater than mine.
I can see the light of day
I need not feel my way
Yes, thy burdens are greater than mine.
Met a lad while on my travels
Tryin' hard to play the game
Though his leg was very crippled
And he could not speak his name
Yet, he smiled in understandin'
Though life to him had been unkind
And as I watched, I cried in sorrow
Oh! Lord his burdens are greater than mine.
I can speak my name aloud
Make my way among the crowd
Yes, his burdens are greater than mine.
Just by chance I passed a graveyard
I saw a young man kneelin' there
In his hand, there were some roses
On his lips, there was a prayer
On a stone, these words were written
'Your soul is God's, your mem'ry mine'
And as I watched, I cried in sorrow
Oh! Lord I see his burdens are greater than mine.
Last night I dreamed of heaven and I saw my mother there
Standing with all the angels on a golden stair
I thought I heard her whisper welcome home my boy
Last night I dreamed of heaven and it filled my heart with joy
I heard the angels singing songs of peace and rest
And then there was a silence
Each eye looked toward the west
There sat my Saviour on his golden throne
Last night I dreamed of heaven my eternal home sweet home
Last night I dreamed of heaven that land so pure and sweet
And the joy within me made my glad heart weep
I was there with my Saviour free from grief and strife
Last night I dreamed of heaven the land of eternal life
I heard the angels singing songs of peace and rest
And then there was a silence
Each eye looked toward the west
There sat my Saviour on his golden throne
Last night I dreamed of heaven my eternal home sweet home
Little girl, if you're feeling low
And you got no place to go
Just give me a ring
Some joy I will bring
'Cause I ain't got nothin' but time
Well, I ain't got nothin' but time
So baby, if you wanna shine
If you take time to look
My number's in the book
And you can call me any time
I'm footloose and I'm fancy free
So baby, just come along with me
Grab your dancin' shoes
We'll go and lose them blues
'Cause I ain't got nothin' but time
If you say so babe, we'll stay all night
Don't worry, 'cause I ain't got no wife
Any time you wanna go
Good gal, just let me know
'Cause I ain't got nothin' but time
No use to sit at home and fine
And let someone trouble your mind
Just come along with me
There's more fish in the sea
And I ain't got nothin' but time
Now baby, just come on and smile
You'll find that life is still worth while
If you just look around
And watch the fellars in this town
That for you ain't got nothin' but time
Lord, I ain't got nothin' but time
So baby, if you wants to shine
If you take time to look
My number's in the book
And you can call me any time
Take this message to my mother
It will fill her heart with joy
tell her that I've met my saviour
God has saved her wand'ring boy.
The tears and sorrow I have caused her
How I wish I could repay
But tell her I'll be waiting for her
We'll meet in heaven some glad day. ...
How she cried when I left her
I know it filled her heart with pain
She said, "son, please don't leave me
For we may never meet again."
Years have passed since that parting
But I know she waits and prays
Soon I'll cross that dark river
Please let her know that I was saved.
Like a hog a rootin' up under a fence
Like a flop-eared mule that ain't got no sense
I've been a fool about you, for way too long
I've been a fool about you, but now I'm gonna get gone
We fight and we fuss like a dog and a cat
I'll tell you right now I've had enough of that
I've been a fool about you, for way too long
I've been a fool about you, but I'm gonna get gone
Well, I said I would leave if you didn't change
Baby, it's time for me to rearrange
I've been a fool about you, for way too long
I've been a fool about you, but now I'm gonna get gone
I'm gettin' sick and tired of the same ole bull
I'll tell you right now, Lord my bucket's 'bout full
I've been a fool about you, for way too long
I've been a fool about you, but now I'm gonna get gone
When my work here is o'er
On that great day I'm going home
To live forever more, just o'er on heaven's shore
When my life here is o'er I'm going home
I'm going home, I'm going home
When my life here is o'er I'm going home
Won't it be so sweet, to rest at Jesus' feet
When my life here is o'er I'm going home
I'm traveling in the light
And my way is clear and bright
Some glad day I'm going home
Heading for the pearly gates for there my savior waits
When my life here is o'er I'm going home
As I travel down life's road
So heavy is my load
But some glad day I'm going home
I'll meet my loved ones there, in that land so bright and fair
When my life here is o'er I'm going home
There's comin' a day when the world shall melt away
And Jesus shall come to claim His own
No more tears, no pain, no woe, in this wicked world below
Then will you be ready to go home
Will you be ready to go, ready to go home
To live with Him up there around the throne
When He says come unto Me, will your soul be clean and free
Then will you be ready to go home
In this world of greed and hate will you wait til it's too late
To claim the Saviour for your own
For He's coming someday, to bear your soul away
Then will you be ready to go home
As you travel day by day, down life's long highway
Are you on the road that leads to wrong
If you'll just travel in His light and pray both day and night
Then you'll be ready to go home
In the great book of John
You're warned of the day
When you'll be laid
Beneath the cold clay
The Angel of Death
Will come from the sky
And claim up your soul
When the time comes to die
When the Angel of Death
Comes down after you
Can you smile and say
That you have been true
Can you truthfully say
With your dying breath
That you're ready to meet
The Angel of Death
When the lights all grow dim
And the dark shadows creep
And then your lived ones
Are gathered to weep
Can you face them and say
With your dying breath
That you're ready to meet
The Angel of Death
When the Angel of Death
Comes down after you
Can you smile and say
That you have been true
Can you truthfully say
With your dying breath
That you're ready to meet
The Angel of Death
ONE TIME YOU KNOW I LOVED YOU TRUE,
THERE WAS NOTHING I WOULDN'T DO,
BUT YOU HAVE TREATED ME SO BAD,
YOU KILLED ALL THE LOVE I EVER HAD.
YOU LEAVE ME ALONE AND RUN AROUND,
YOU WERE THE TALK OF THE TOWN,
IT MADE YOU GLAD TO SEE ME SAD,
YOU KILLED ALL THE LOVE I EVER HAD.
NO ONE KNOWS THE TORTURE I WENT THROUGH,
LOVING YOU AND KNOWING YOU WERE UNTRUE,
IT'S OVER NOW AND I'M SO GLAD,
YOU KILLED ALL THE LOVE I EVER HAD.
ALL THESE YEARS I'VE SET AND CRIED,
A THOUSAND TIMES MY POOR SOUL DIED,
YOU HAVE TREATED ME SO BAD,
YOU KILLED ALL THE LOVE I EVER HAD.
Oh don't you know that Jesus died to wash your sins away
Please heed His call and in sin don't fall
We're getting closer to the grave each day
They nailed his hands there on the cross
On His head the thorns did lay
Be prepared to go, there's one thing I know
We're getting closer to the grave each day
Sinner man won't you stop now and pray
Leave the road of sin alone
Let Jesus lead you home
We're getting closer to the grave each day
If you will listen
A song I will sing
About my daddy
Who ran a log train
Way down in the southland
In old Alabam'
We lived in a place
That they called Chapman Town
And late in the evening
When the sun was low
Way off in the distance
You could hear the train blow
The folks would come runnin'
and mama would sing
Get the supper on the table
Here comes the log train
Every morning
At the break day
He'd grab his lunch bucket
And be on his way
Winter or summer
Sunshine or rain
Every morning he'd run
That old log train
A sweatin' and swearin'
All day long
Shoutin' get up the oxens
Keep movin' along
Load'er up boys
'cause it looks like rain
I've got to get rollin'
This old log train
This story happened
A long time ago
The log train is silent
God called dad to go
But when I get to heaven
To always remain
I'll listen for whistle
On the old log train
There's a tear in my beer 
'cause I'm cryin' for you, dear 
you are on my lonely mind. 
Into these last nine beers 
I have shed a million tears. 
You are on my lonely mind
I'm gonna keep drinkin'
until I'm petrified.
And then maybe these tears 
will leave my eyes.
There's a tear in my beer 
cause I'm crying' for you dear
You are on my lonely mind.
Last night I walked the floor
and the night before
You are on my lonely mind.
It seems my life is through
and I'm so doggone blue
You are on my lonely mind.
I'm gonna keep drinkin'
till I can't move a toe
and then maybe my heart
won't hurt me so.
There's a tear in my beer
cause I'm cryin' for you dear
You are on my lonely mind.
Lord, I've tried and I've tried
But my tears I can't hide
You are on my lonely mind.
All these blues that I've found
Have really got me down
You are on my lonely mind
I'm gonna keep drinkin' till I can't even think
Cause in the last week I ain't slept a wink
There's a tear in my beer
cause I'm crying for you dear
You are on my lonely mind.
I was sad and blue, I was down-hearted, too
It seemed like the whole world was lost
And I took a chance, and we happened to dance
To the tune of the ALABAMA WALTZ.
Waltz, Waltz, the ALABAMA WALTZ
There all my fears and tears were lost
There in your arms, with all of your charms
We danced to the ALABAMA WALTZ.
When everything goes wrong
And it seems all hope is gone
I remember how my Savior died
He died there on the cross
So this world would not be lost
Jesus died for me long ago
Jesus died for me long ago
On a hillside far away
He was tortured and slain
God bless His Holy name
Jesus died for me long ago
What pain He suffered there
The Holy One so dear
So that you and I could live
I'll try to repay
For His sufferin' on that day
Jesus died for me long ago
As He hung there all alone
His life's blood almost gone
He never stopped prayin' for me
So I'll follow all the way
And live with Him someday
Jesus died for me long ago
While strolling thru a lovely garden
As day was drawing to a close...
My eyes beheld a tragic story
I saw a teardrop on a rose.
It should have been a tear of gladness
But deep inside the sorrow shows
A trusting heart had just been broken
I saw a teardrop on a rose.
A sobbing tear that follows parting
Holds all the pain that sorrow knows
A false goodbye a life is shattered
There lies a story on a rose.
The tear will dry the rose will wither
I loved, I lost, my story ended
With just a teardrop on a rose.
When your soul is weary and it seems you've lost your way
Jesus is calling, calling night and day
When you need a friend to go with you all the way 
Jesus is calling, calling night and day
Jesus is calling, calling night and day
And you will hear Him if you'll just pray
Calling for you (my brother) don't turn away (from Jesus)
Jesus is calling, calling night and day
If you're lost in sin. there's no need for you to stay
Jesus is calling, calling night and day
If the night is dark, you will soon see the day
Jesus is calling, calling night and day
In Life's many battles that you will have to fight
Just stay close to Jesus and journey in His light
Then on that judgement morning when all pain has fled
You'll stand in God's Kingdom, When The Book Of Life Is Read.
When the seals are broken and names are read aloud
You'll see many loved ones standin' in the crowd
So brother keep on prayin' and follow where you're lead
You'll stand in God's Kingdom, When The Book Of Life Is Read.
All your dreams of heaven will come true on that day
When the sky shall open and this earth melt away
Then all God's faithful children will raise up from the dead
United in God's Kingdom, When The Book Of Life Is Read.
What a happy feelin' to know He'll always care
And when our work is over heaven with Him we'll share
There's be no pain or sorrow, no tears will e'er be shed
When we stand there in God's Kingdom and The Book Of Life Is Read.
I like candy, I like cake, I like jam but goodness sake
There's nothin' as sweet as my baby
Golden hair and big blue eyes she could win a beauty prize
There's nothin' as sweet as my baby
If I ever lose her I'll lay me down and die
If sugar seems sweet then you ought to meet
My honey coated sweetie pie
I like candy, I like cake, I like jam but goodness sake
There's nothin' as sweet as my baby
I like candy, I like cake, I like jam but goodness sake
There's nothin' as sweet as my baby
I feel like a honey bee, when she's buzzing round with me
There's nothin' as sweet as my baby
Got pounds of candy kisses, but I can't spare an ounce
She's sweeter than wine and brother she's mine
And that's the only thing that counts
I like candy, I like cake, I like jam but goodness sakes 
There's nothin' as sweet as my baby
When I get to Glory, I'm gonna sing, sing, sing
I'm gonna let the hallelujahs ring
I'm gonna praise my blessed Saviour's name
When I get to Glory, I'm Gonna sing, sing, sing.
In this world of sorrow, I've seen trouble and woe
When I get to Glory I'll see no more
For I know my prayers have not been in vain
When I get to Glory, I'm gonna sing, sing, sing.
Sometimes I get so weary inside
Then I recall how my Jesus died
Up there I know, there'll be no pain
When I get to Glory, I'm gonna sing, sing, sing.
Up there no tears will blind my eyes
And I'll walk along by my Jesus' side
I'll meet my loved ones all once again
When I get to Glory, I'm Gonna sing, sing, sing.
I've tried and tried to run and hide
To find a life that's new
But where I go, I always know
I can't escape from you.
A jug of wine to numb my mind
But what good does it do
The jug runs dry and still I cry
I can't escape from you.
These wasted tears are souvenirs
Of a love I thought was true
Your memory is chained to me
I can't escape from you.
There is no end, I can't pretend
That dreams will soon come true
A slave too long to a heart of stone
I can't escape from you.
Weary blues from waitin'
Lord, I've been waitin' too long
These blues have got me cryin'
The snow falls 'round my window
But it can't chill my heart
God knows it died the day you left
My dream world fell a part.
Weary blues from waitin'
Lord, I've been waitin' too long
These blues have got me cryin'
Thru tears I watch young lovers
As they go strollin' by
Oh, all the things that might have been
God forgive me if I cry.
Weary blues from waitin'
Lord, I've been waitin' too long
These blues have got me cryin'
On your journey to the grave
would you stop and try to save
Are you walkin and a-talkin with the lord? 
Would you lend a helping hand
to some poor sinner man
Are you walkin and a-talkin with the lord? 
Are you walkin, (are you walkin)
are you talkin, (are you talkin)
Are you walkin and a-talkin with the lord? 
Are you traveling in his light
every day and every night
Are you walkin and a talkin with the lord? 
If you heart said testify, would the world hear your reply
Are you walkin and a-talkin with the lord?
Would you stand and shout his name or bow your head in shame
Are you walkin and a-talkin with the lord? 
Are you walkin and a-talkin with the lord? 
Will he take you by the hand and lead you to that promised land
Are you walkin and a-talkin with the lord? 
I'll be your baby
And I don't mean maybe
If you'll be a baby to me
I'll be your darlin'
And there'll be no quarralin'
If you'll be a baby to me
I can plow and milk the cow
I'll even do the churnin'
You just look through your cookbook
And keep the homefires burnin'
Baby, I'll be your baby
If you'll be a baby to me
When God dips His pen of love in my heart
And writes my soul the message He wants me to know
His spirit all divine fills this sinful soul of mine
When God dips His love in my heart
I said I wouldn't tell it to a living soul
How He brought salvation when He made me whole
But I found I couldn't hide
Such love as Jesus did impart
It makes me laugh and it makes me cry
Sets my sinful soul on fire
When God dips His love in my heart
He walked every step up Calvary's ragged way
And He gave His life completely to bring a better day
My life was lost in sinned but in love He took me in
His blood washed all my sins away
I said I wouldn't tell it to a living soul
How He brought salvation when He made me whole
But I found I couldn't hide
Such love as Jesus did impart
It makes me laugh and it makes me cry
Sets my sinful soul on fire
When God dips His love in my heart
Teardrops fell the night you said
I love you dear but you are wed
I watched you as you held his hand
then I turned away and cried again
I cried again when I reached home
There sat your picture all alone
I thought of things that might have been
I bowed my head and cried again
I took your letters from the shelf
Then read aloud just to myself
But just before I reached the end
I bowed my head and cried again
And here's the reason why I say
Dear, I must throw your things away
For they would only bring me pain
And I'd bow my head and cry again
At first when I heard of some people who claim
That the old-time religion was real
I said "I'll go down, take a look at the crowd
For just that weak-minded I feel."
I walked up the steps and I peeked in the door
But the Devil said, "Don't you go in!"
But I said, "It won't hurt me I'll just step inside
And I'll set as far back as I can." 
Something Got A Hold Of Me (Praise God)
Yes Something Got A Hold Of Me (Oh! Lord)
I went there to fight, but I'll tell you that night
God certainly got a hold of me.
They sang like they meant it, they all clapped their hands
I said, "It's commotion, that's all." 
"When they get down to pray, I'll just get up and leave
For I don't want be seen here at all."
But I bowed that time, he got started to preach
And he looked straight down at me
He told ev'rybody how mean that I was
He didn't talk like he thought much of me.
I sat in my seat just thinkin' it o'er
And then they all started to pray
The fire fell from Heaven, I fell to the floor
I prayed there and God had His way. (For-)
Out on the perilous deep
Where dangers silently creep
And storms so violently sweep
You're drifting to far from the shore
Drifting too far from the shore (from the shore)
You're drifting to far from the shore
Today the tempest rolls high
And clouds overshadow the sky
Sure death is hovering nigh
You're drifting to far from the shore
Why meet a terrible fate
Mercy abundantly waits
Turn back before its to late
You're drifting to far from the shore
Only a tramp was lazarus sad fate
He who lay down at the rich mans gate
He begged for the crumbs from the rich man to eat
He was only a tramp found dead on the street.
he was some mothers darlin, he was some mothers son
Once he was fair and once he was young
And some mother rocked him, her darlin to sleep
But they left him to die like a tramp on the street.
jesus, he died on calvarys tree
He shed his lifes blood for you and for me
They pierced his side and then his feet
And they left him to die like a tramp on the street.
he was marys own darlin, he was gods chosen son
Once he was fair and once he was young
Mary, she rocked him, her darlin to sleep
Then the gods would deny you on the great judgement day.
On that resurrection morning 
When all dead in Christ shall rise
I'll have a new body
Praise the Lord, I'll have a new life
Won't it be so bright and fair
When we meet our love ones there
I'll have a new body 
Praise the Lord, I'll have a new life
I'll have a new home of glory eternal 
Where the redeemed of God shall stand
There'll be no more sorrow
There'll be no more strife
Raised in the likeness of my Savior
Ready to live in Paradise
I'll have a new body
Praise the Lord, I'll have a new life 
When old Gabriel blows his trumpet
And we walk the streets of gold
I'll have a new body 
Praise the Lord, I'll have a new life
No more pain worry sorrow
In this wicked world of sin
I'll have a new body 
Praise the Lord, I'll have a new life
I'll have a new home of glory eternal 
Where the redeemed of God shall stand
There'll be no more sorrow
There'll be no more strife
Raised in the likeness of my Savior
Ready to live in Paradise
I'll have a new body
Praise the Lord, I'll have a new life 
Oh dear brother are you living 
For that day when Christ shall come
I'll have a new body 
Praise the Lord, I'll have a new life 
Graves all bursting Saints a shouting 
Heavenly beauty all around 
I'll have a new body 
Praise the Lord, I'll have a new life 
I'll have a new home of glory eternal 
Where the redeemed of God shall stand
There'll be no more sorrow
There'll be no more strife
Raised in the likeness of my Savior
Ready to live in Paradise
I'll have a new body
Praise the Lord, I'll have a new life
I want to live and love under the stars above
I want to ho hold you close to my heart...
and I'm telling you just what my love'll do
I want to live and love always
To Canaan's land I'm on my way
Where the soul of man never dies
Where the soul........never dies
My darkest night will turn to day
Where the soul of man never dies
Where the soul.............never dies.
Dear friend there'll be no sad farewells
No sad..........farewells
There'll be no tear-dimmed eyes
No tear-........... dimmed eyes
Where all is joy, peace and love
Where all..........is joy
And the soul of man never dies
And the soul.........never dies.
A garden's blooming there for me
Where the soul of man never dies
Where the soul........never dies
And I shall spend eternity
Where the soul of man never dies
Where the soul........never dies.
A love-light beams across the foam
Where the soul of man never dies
Where the soul........never dies
It shines to light the fires of home
Where the soul of man never dies
Where the soul........never dies.
My life will end in deathless sleep
Where the soul of man never dies
Where the soul........never dies
And everlasting joys I'll reap
Where the soul of man never dies
Where the soul........never dies.
I'm on my way to that fair land
Where the soul of man never dies
Where the soul........never dies
Where there will be no parting hand
Where the soul of man never dies
Where the soul........never dies.
A Prodigal son once strayed from his father
To travel a land of hunger and pain
And now I can see the end of my journey
I'm going to heaven again.
I leave you the day, to help all your neighbors
I leave you the night, to solemnly pray
So try to repent and ask for forgiveness
We'll meet up in heaven, someday.
Goodbye to this world, with all its sorrows
Goodbye to the fields, that I used to roam
I'm going away where, life is eternal
My Shepherd is callin me home.
From out of the sky, He's coming to meet me
To wash all my sins and call me His own
His servants will bring, a ring for my finger
And never no more will I roam.
Today I passed you on the street
And my heart fell at your feet
I Can't Help It If I'm Still In Love With You
Somebody else stood by your side
And he looked so satisfied
I Can't Help It If I'm Still In Love With You ...
A picture from the past came slowly stealing
As I brushed your arm and walked so close to you ...
Then suddenly I got that old time feeling
I Can't Help It If I'm Still In Love With You.
It's hard to know another's lips will kiss you
And hold you just the way I used to do
Oh, heaven only knows how much I miss you
I Can't Help It If I'm Still In Love With You.