To course across more kindly waters now
my talent’s little vessel lifts her sails,
leaving behind herself a sea so cruel;
and what I sing will be that second kingdom,
in which the human soul is cleansed of sin,
becoming worthy of ascent to Heaven.
But here, since I am yours, o holy Muses,
may this poem rise again from Hell’s dead realm;
and may Calliope rise somewhat here,
accompanying my singing with that music
whose power struck the poor Pierides
so forcefully that they despaired of pardon.
The gentle hue of oriental sapphire
in which the sky’s serenity was steeped—
its aspect pure as far as the horizon—
brought back my joy in seeing just as soon
as I had left behind the air of death
that had afflicted both my sight and breast.
The lovely planet that is patroness
of love made all the eastern heavens glad,
veiling the Pisces in the train she led.
Then I turned to the right, setting my mind
upon the other pole, and saw four stars
not seen before except by the first people.
Heaven appeared to revel in their flames:
o northern hemisphere, because you were
denied that sight, you are a widower!
After my eyes took leave of those four stars,
turning a little toward the other pole,
from which the Wain had disappeared by now,
I saw a solitary patriarch
near me—his aspect worthy of such reverence
that even son to father owes no more.
His beard was long and mixed with white, as were
the hairs upon his head; and his hair spread
down to his chest in a divided tress.
The rays of the four holy stars so framed
his face with light that in my sight he seemed
like one who is confronted by the sun.
Who are you—who, against the hidden river,
were able to escape the eternal prison?
he said, moving those venerable plumes.
Who was your guide? What served you both as lantern
when, from the deep night that will always keep
the hellish valley dark, you were set free?
The laws of the abyss—have they been broken?
Or has a new, a changed decree in Heaven
let you, though damned, approach my rocky slopes?
My guide took hold of me decisively;
by way of words and hands and other signs,
he made my knees and brow show reverence.
Then he replied: I do not come through my
own self. There was a lady sent from Heaven;
her pleas led me to help and guide this man.
But since your will would have a far more full
and accurate account of our condition,
my will cannot withhold what you request.
This man had yet to see his final evening;
but, through his folly, little time was left
before he did—he was so close to it.
As I have told you, I was sent to him
for his deliverance; the only road
I could have taken was the road I took.
I showed him all the people of perdition;
now I intend to show to him those spirits
who, in your care, are bent on expiation.
To tell you how I led him would take long;
it is a power descending from above
that helps me guide him here, to see and hear you.
Now may it please you to approve his coming;
he goes in search of liberty—so precious,
as he who gives his life for it must know.
You know it—who, in Utica, found death
for freedom was not bitter, when you left
the garb that will be bright on the great day.
Eternal edicts are not broken for us;
this man’s alive, and I’m not bound by Minos;
but I am from the circle where the chaste
eyes of your Marcia are; and she still prays
to you, o holy breast, to keep her as
your own: for her love, then, incline to us.
Allow our journey through your seven realms.
I shall thank her for kindness you bestow—
if you would let your name be named below.
While I was there, within the other world,
Marcia so pleased my eyes, he then replied,
each kindness she required, I satisfied.
Now that she dwells beyond the evil river,
she has no power to move me any longer,
such was the law decreed when I was freed.
But if a lady come from Heaven speeds
and helps you, as you say, there is no need
of flattery; it is enough, indeed,
to ask me for her sake. Go then; but first
wind a smooth rush around his waist and bathe
his face, to wash away all of Hell’s stains;
for it would not be seemly to approach
with eyes still dimmed by any mists, the first
custodian angel, one from Paradise.
This solitary island, all around
its very base, there where the breakers pound,
bears rushes on its soft and muddy ground.
There is no other plant that lives below:
no plant with leaves or plant that, as it grows,
hardens—and breaks beneath the waves’ harsh blows.
That done, do not return by this same pass;
the sun, which rises now, will show you how
this hillside can be climbed more easily.
With that he vanished; and without a word,
I rose and drew in closer to my guide,
and it was on him that I set my eyes.
And he began: Son, follow in my steps;
let us go back; this is the point at which
the plain slopes down to reach its lowest bounds.
Daybreak was vanquishing the dark’s last hour,
which fled before it; in the distance, I
could recognize the trembling of the sea.
We made our way across the lonely plain,
like one returning to a lost pathway,
who, till he finds it, seems to move in vain.
When we had reached the point where dew contends
with sun and, under sea winds, in the shade,
wins out because it won’t evaporate,
my master gently placed both of his hands—
outspread—upon the grass; therefore, aware
of what his gesture and intention were,
I reached and offered him my tear—stained cheeks;
and on my cheeks, he totally revealed
the color that Inferno had concealed.
Then we arrived at the deserted shore,
which never yet had seen its waters coursed
by any man who journeyed back again.
There, just as pleased another, he girt me.
O wonder! Where he plucked the humble plant
that he had chosen, there that plant sprang up
again, identical, immediately.
By now the sun was crossing the horizon
of the meridian whose highest point
covers Jerusalem; and from the Ganges,
night, circling opposite the sun, was moving
together with the Scales that, when the length
of dark defeats the day, desert night’s hands;
so that, above the shore that I had reached,
the fair Aurora’s white and scarlet cheeks
were, as Aurora aged, becoming orange.
We still were by the sea, like those who think
about the journey they will undertake,
who go in heart but in the body stay.
And just as Mars, when it is overcome
by the invading mists of dawn, glows red
above the waters’ plain, low in the west,
so there appeared to me—and may I see it
again—a light that crossed the sea: so swift,
there is no flight of bird to equal it.
When, for a moment, I’d withdrawn my eyes
that I might ask a question of my guide,
I saw that light again, larger, more bright.
Then, to each side of it, I saw a whiteness,
though I did not know what that whiteness was;
below, another whiteness slowly showed.
My master did not say a word before
the whitenesses first seen appeared as wings;
but then, when he had recognized the helmsman,
he cried: “Bend, bend your knees: behold the angel
of God, and join your hands; from this point on,
this is the kind of minister you’ll meet.
See how much scorn he has for human means;
he’d have no other sail than his own wings
and use no oar between such distant shores.
See how he holds his wings, pointing to Heaven,
piercing the air with his eternal pinions,
which do not change as mortal plumage does.”
Then he—that bird divine—as he drew closer
and closer to us, seemed to gain in brightness,
so that my eyes could not endure his nearness,
and I was forced to lower them; and he
came on to shore with boat so light, so quick
that nowhere did the water swallow it.
The helmsman sent from Heaven, at the stern,
seemed to have blessedness inscribed upon him;
more than a hundred spirits sat within.
“In exitu Israel de Aegypto,”
with what is written after of that psalm,
all of those spirits sang as with one voice.
Then over them he made the holy cross
as sign; they flung themselves down on the shore,
and he moved off as he had come—swiftly.
The crowd that he had left along the beach
seemed not to know the place; they looked about
like those whose eyes try out things new to them.
Upon all sides the sun shot forth the day;
and from mid—heaven its incisive arrows
already had chased Capricorn away,
when those who’d just arrived lifted their heads
toward us and said: “Do show us, if you know,
the way by which we can ascend this slope.”
And Virgil answered: “You may be convinced
that we are quite familiar with this shore;
but we are strangers here, just as you are;
we came but now, a little while before you,
though by another path, so difficult
and dense that this ascent seems sport to us.”
The souls who, noticing my breathing, sensed
that I was still a living being, then,
out of astonishment, turned pale; and just
as people crowd around a messenger
who bears an olive branch, to hear his news,
and no one hesitates to join that crush,
so here those happy spirits—all of them—
stared hard at my face, just as if they had
forgotten to proceed to their perfection.
I saw one of those spirits moving forward
in order to embrace me—his affection
so great that I was moved to mime his welcome.
O shades—in all except appearance—empty!
Three times I clasped my hands behind him and
as often brought them back against my chest.
Dismay, I think, was painted on my face;
at this, that shadow smiled as he withdrew;
and I, still seeking him, again advanced.
Gently, he said that I could now stand back;
then I knew who he was, and I beseeched
him to remain awhile and talk with me.
He answered: “As I loved you when I was
within my mortal flesh, so, freed, I love you:
therefore I stay. But you, why do you journey?”
“My own Casella, to return again
to where I am, I journey thus; but why,”
I said, “were you deprived of so much time?”
And he: “No injury is done to me
if he who takes up whom—and when—he pleases
has kept me from this crossing many times,
for his own will derives from a just will.
And yet, for three months now, he has accepted,
most tranquilly, all those who would embark.
Therefore, I, who had turned then to the shore
at which the Tiber’s waters mix with salt,
was gathered in by his benevolence.
Straight to that river mouth, he set his wings:
that always is the place of gathering
for those who do not sink to Acheron.”
And I: “If there’s no new law that denies
you memory or practice of the songs
of love that used to quiet all my longings,
then may it please you with those songs to solace
my soul somewhat; for—having journeyed here
together with my body—it is weary.”
“Love that discourses to me in my mind”
he then began to sing—and sang so sweetly
that I still hear that sweetness sound in me.
My master, I, and all that company
around the singer seemed so satisfied,
as if no other thing might touch our minds.
We all were motionless and fixed upon
the notes, when all at once the grave old man
cried out: “What have we here, you laggard spirits?
What negligence, what lingering is this?
Quick, to the mountain to cast off the slough
that will not let you see God show Himself!”
Even as doves, assembled where they feed,
quietly gathering their grain or weeds,
forgetful of their customary strut,
will, if some thing appears that makes them fear,
immediately leave their food behind
because they are assailed by greater care;
so did I see that new—come company—
they left the song behind, turned toward the slope,
like those who go and yet do not know where.
And we were no less hasty in departure.
